
===== pdf p150 =====
131
Chapter 11
Medicolegal Concerns 
for Teleradiology
Upon completion of Chapter 11, the reader will be able to:
 1. Define the American College of Radiology standards for teleradiology.
 2. Understand the ACR goals for teleradiology.
 3. Identify the qualifications of personnel and equipment specifications for 
teleradiology.
 4. Describe licensing, credentialing, and liability, to include quality control, 
improvement safety, infection control, and patient education concerns.
 5. Define the legal issues regarding liability, responsibility, accountability, and 
duty of care.
 6. Understand the security and confidentiality of teleradiologic images.
Introduction to Teleradiology Advances
Technological advances in teleradiology cannot be considered independently of the 
revolutionary developments that have occurred in the past 20 years in the field 
of medical imaging, paving the way for the increasingly important role of infor -
mation technology and telecommunications in healthcare. The diagnostic imag -
ing department of the future will make extensive use of computer networks, mass 
storage devices, and sophisticated workstations at which humans and machines 
will interact, assisted by advanced information processing tools and techniques of 
86634.indb   131 8/4/08   8:42:47 AM

===== pdf p151 =====
132  n  Medicolegal Issues for Diagnostic Imaging Professionals
knowledge engineering, to achieve integration of multimodality imaging data and 
expert medical knowledge.
Picture archiving and communications systems (PACS) form the core of such 
an environment, and include the acquisition, storage, communication, display, 
and manipulation of diagnostic images and related patient data. Teleradiology 
services build upon and extend this environment to interhospital or hospital-to- 
point-of-need communications on a regional, national, or global scale. Therefore, 
teleradiology can be considered as an extended virtual radiology department that 
encompasses available physical and human resources over a wide region in order to 
support remote diagnostic procedures and patient management. Possible teleradiol-
ogy scenarios at various geographical scales include:
 1. Local area services that are within the same building or adjacent buildings of the 
same hospital — Radiologist reviews images and provides primary reporting 
and real-time remote consultation for critical cases, such as patients in the 
intensive care unit, the emergency department, or the operating room. This 
effectively corresponds to teleradiology services offered using the resources of 
a local PACS.
 2. Metropolitan area services that are within the same metropolitan area  — Imag-
ing specialists in a major hospital offer consultation and provide support for 
specific diagnostic procedures to other hospitals and private physicians in the 
same metropolitan area.
 3. Wide area or global services that cover an extended geographical region and may 
cross country borders  — Diagnostic imaging examinations are performed 
by primary care or rural physicians and can be monitored by specialists at 
a major referral medical center, who can also provide consultation on the 
diagnostic interpretation of acquired images. Radiologists in a hospital can 
consult with colleagues or subspecialists located in other hospitals. Medical 
imaging specialists in a hospital may also provide support to mobile diagnos -
tic imaging units or units at remote and isolated sites, which may or may not 
have a radiologist on site.
Teleradiology Services Involve Multimedia Communications
In teleradiology, the basic component of the communication object is the diagnostic 
image. Additional medical and demographic patient data, the referring physician’s 
comments, and the radiologists’ report are of a textual type. Teleconsultation may 
also involve the real-time transmission of voice and video data. Video frames, from 
image sequences of dynamic diagnostic imaging procedures and patient monitor -
ing sessions, may also be included as part of the communication object. Current 
advances in the indexing and management of multimedia data are likely to impact 
future developments in teleradiology services and applications.
86634.indb   132 8/4/08   8:42:47 AM

===== pdf p152 =====
Medicolegal Concerns for Teleradiology  n  133
Teleradiology services involve the use of heterogeneous hardware and soft -
ware systems. The degree to which such systems can be fully integrated will have 
a significant effect on the efficiency with which such services are provided and, 
consequently, on their effectiveness and acceptance by the healthcare community. 
Therefore, integration mechanisms based on a unified user interface, a unified com-
puterized patient record, which may consist of geographically distributed segments, 
and intelligent distributed hierarchical storage management are absolutely impor -
tant in any attempt at providing efficient teleradiology services in an integrated 
healthcare environment (Excerpts from Orphanoudakis et al., 1996. Technological 
advances in teleradiology, European Journal of Radiology , 22: 205–217).
American College of Radiology (ACR) 
Standard for Teleradiology
The standards of the American College of Radiology (ACR) are not rules, but are 
guidelines that attempt to define principles of practice that should generally pro -
duce high quality radiologic care. The physician and medical physicist may mod -
ify an existing standard as determined for the individual patient and by available 
sources. Adherence to ACR standards will not assure a successful outcome in every 
situation. The standards should not be deemed inclusive of all proper methods of 
care, or exclusive of other methods of care reasonably directed to obtaining the 
same results. The standards are not intended to establish a legal standard of care 
or conduct, and deviation from a standard does not, in and of itself, indicate or 
imply that such medical practice is below an acceptable level of care. The ultimate 
judgment regarding the propriety of any specific procedure or course of conduct 
must be made by the physician and medical physicist in light of all circumstances 
presented by the individual situation.
Definition
Teleradiology is the electronic transmission of radiologic images from one location 
to another for the purpose of interpretation and/or consultation. Teleradiology may 
allow more timely interpretation of radiologic images and give greater access to sec-
ondary consultations and improved continuing education. Users in different loca -
tions may simultaneously view images. Appropriately utilized, teleradiology may 
improve access to radiologic interpretations and, thus, improve patient care.
Teleradiology is not appropriate if the available teleradiology system does not 
provide images of sufficient quality to perform the indicated task. When a telera -
diology system is used to render the official interpretation, there should not be a 
clinically significant loss of data from image acquisition through transmission to 
final image display. For transmission of images for display use only, the image qual-
ity should be sufficient to satisfy the needs of the clinical circumstance. While not 
86634.indb   133 8/4/08   8:42:47 AM

===== pdf p153 =====
134  n  Medicolegal Issues for Diagnostic Imaging Professionals
all inclusive, the standard should serve as a model for all physicians and healthcare 
workers who utilize teleradiology.
Goals
Teleradiology is an evolving technology. New goals will continue to emerge. The 
current goals of teleradiology include:
Providing consultative and interpretive radiologic services
Making radiologic consultations available to medical facilities without onsite 
radiologic support
Providing timely availability of radiologic images and image interpretation in 
emergent and nonemergent clinical care areas
Facilitating radiologic interpretations in on-call situations
Providing subspecialty radiologic support as needed
Enhancing educational opportunities for practicing radiologists
Promoting efficiency and quality improvements
Providing interpreted images to referring providers
Supporting telemedicine
Providing supervision of offsite imaging studies
Qualifications of Personnel
The radiologic examination at the transmitting site must be performed by qualified 
personnel trained in the examination to be performed. In all cases, this means a 
licensed and/or registered radiologic technologist, radiation therapist, nuclear med-
icine technologist, or sonographer. This technologist must be under the supervision 
of a qualified licensed physician.
It is desirable to have a qualified medical physicist and/or image management 
specialist on site or serving as consultants. The following will identify the qualifica -
tions of all the personnel involved in teleradiologic services:
 1. Physician — The official interpretation of images must be done by a physician 
who has:
 1. An understanding of the basic technology of teleradiology, its strengths 
and weaknesses, as well as limitations, and who is knowledgeable in the 
use of teleradiology equipment.
 2. Demonstrated qualifications as delineated in the appropriate ACR stan -
dard for the particular diagnostic modality being transmitted through 
teleradiology.
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
86634.indb   134 8/4/08   8:42:47 AM

===== pdf p154 =====
Medicolegal Concerns for Teleradiology  n  135
 2. Radiologic technologist, radiation therapist, nuclear medicine technologist, 
or sonographer should be:
 1. Certified by the appropriate registry and/or possess unrestricted state 
licensure.
 2. Trained to properly operate and supervise the teleradiology system.
 3. Qualified Medical Physicist — An individual who is competent to practice 
independently in one or more of the subfields in medical physics. The ACR 
considers that certification and continuing education in the appropriate 
subfield(s) demonstrates that an individual is competent to practice one or 
more of the subfields in medical physics and to be a qualified medical physi -
cist. The ACR recommends that the individual be certified in the appropriate 
subfield(s) by the American Board of Radiology (ABR).
  The appropriate subfields of medical physics include therapeutic radiologic 
physics, diagnostic radiologic physics, medical nuclear physics, and radiologic 
physics.
  Continuing education of a qualified medical physicist should be in accor -
dance with the ACR Standard for Continuing Medical Education (Res. 17, 
1996).
 4. Image Management Specialist:
 1. The image management specialist is an individual who is qualified to 
assess and provide problem-solving input, initiate repair, and coordinate 
system-wide maintenance programs to assure sustainable high-image 
quality and system function. This individual would also be directly 
involved with any system expansion programs.
 2. This specialist should be available in a timely manner in case of malfunc -
tion to facilitate the return to optimal system functionality.
Equipment Specifications
Specifications for equipment used in teleradiology will vary depending on the indi-
vidual facility’s needs, but in all cases should provide image quality and availability 
appropriate to the clinical need. Compliance with the ACR/NEMA (National Elec-
trical Manufacturers Association) Digital Imaging and Communication in Medicine 
(DICOM) Standard is strongly recommended for all new equipment acquisitions, 
and consideration of periodic upgrades incorporating the expanding features of that 
standard should be part of the continuing quality-improvement program.
Equipment guidelines cover two basic categories of teleradiology when used for 
rendering the official interpretation:
 1. Small matrix size, such as CT, MRI, sonography, nuclear medicine, digital 
fluoroscopy, and digital angiography
 2. Large matrix size, such as digital radiography and digitized radiographic films
86634.indb   135 8/4/08   8:42:48 AM

===== pdf p155 =====
136  n  Medicolegal Issues for Diagnostic Imaging Professionals
When using small matrix size, the dataset should provide a minimum of a 512 × 
512 matrix size at a minimum of an 8-bit pixel depth for processing or manipula -
tion, with no loss of matrix size or bit depth at display. With the large matrix size, 
the data should allow for a minimum of 2.5 line pair/millimeter (lp/mm) spatial 
resolution at a minimum of 10-bit pixel depth.
Acquisition or Digitization
Initial image acquisition should be performed in accordance with the appropriate 
ACR modality or examination standard.
. 1. Direct Image Capture
  The entire image data set produced by the digital modality both in terms of 
image matrix size and pixel bit depth should be transferred to the teleradiol -
ogy system. It is recommended that the DICOM standard be used.
 2. Secondary Image Capture
 1. Small matrix images  — Each individual image should be digitized to a 
matrix size as large as or larger than that of the original image by the 
imaging modality. The images should be digitized to a minimum of 8 bits 
pixel depth. Film digitization or video frame grab systems conforming to 
the above specifications are acceptable.
 2. Large matrix images — These images should be digitized to a matrix size 
corresponding to 2.5 lp/mm or greater, measured in the original detec -
tor plane. The images should be digitized to a minimum of 10 bits pixel 
depth.
 3. General Provisions
  At the time of acquisition, small or large matrix, the system must include 
annotating capabilities including patient name, identification number, date 
and time of examination, name of facility or institution of acquisition, 
type of examination, patient or anatomic part orientation, and amount and 
method of data compression. The capability to record a brief patient history 
is desirable.
Compression
Data compression may be used to increase transmission speed and reduce stor -
age requirements. Several methods, including both reversible and irreversible tech -
niques, may be used under the direction of a qualified physician, with no reduction 
in clinically significant diagnostic image quality. The types and ratios of compres -
sion used for different imaging studies transmitted and stored by the system should 
be selected and periodically reviewed by the responsible physician to ensure appro -
priate clinical image quality.
86634.indb   136 8/4/08   8:42:48 AM

===== pdf p156 =====
Medicolegal Concerns for Teleradiology  n  137
Transmission
The type and specifications of the transmission devices used will be dictated by the 
environment of the studies to be transmitted. In all cases, for official interpretation, 
the digital data received at the receiving end of any transmission must have no loss 
of clinically significant information. The transmission system shall have adequate 
error-checking capability.
Display Capabilities
Display workstations used for official interpretation and employed for small and 
large matrix systems should provide the following characteristics:
 1. Luminance of the gray-scale monitors should be at least 50-foot lamberts
 2. Lighting in the reading room should be controlled to eliminate reflections in 
the monitor and to lower the ambient lighting level as much as is possible
 3. Capability for selecting image sequence
 4. Capability for accurately associating the patient and study demographics 
characterizations with the study images
 5. Capability of window and level adjustments, if those data are available
 6. Capability of pan and zoom functions
 7. Capability of rotating or flipping the images provided correct labeling of 
patient orientation is preserved
 8. Capability of calculating and displaying accurate linear measurements 
and pixel value determinations in appropriate values for modality, such as 
Houndsfield units for CT images, if those data are available
 9. Capability of displaying prior image compression ratio, processing, or cropping
 10. The following elements of display should be available:
 1. Matrix size
 2. Bit depth
 3. Total number of images acquired in the study
 4. Clinically relevant technical parameters
When display systems are not used for the official interpretation, they need not 
meet all the characteristics listed above.
Archiving and Retrieval
If electronic archiving is to be employed, the guidelines listed below should be 
followed.
86634.indb   137 8/4/08   8:42:48 AM

===== pdf p157 =====
138  n  Medicolegal Issues for Diagnostic Imaging Professionals
 1. Teleradiology systems should provide storage capacity sufficient to comply 
with all facility, state, and federal regulations regarding medical record reten-
tion. Images stored at either site should meet the jurisdictional requirements 
of the transmitting site. Images interpreted offsite need not be stored at the 
receiving facility, provided they are stored at the transmitted site. However, 
if the images are retained at the receiving site, the retention period of that 
jurisdiction must be met as well. The policy on record retention must be in 
writing.
 2. Each examination data file must have an accurate corresponding patient and 
examination database record, which includes patient name, identification, 
and facility at which the examination was performed. It is desirable that space 
be available for a brief clinical history.
 3. Prior examinations should be retrievable from archives in a time frame appro-
priate to the clinical needs of the facility and medical staff.
 4. Each facility should have policies and procedures for archiving and storage of 
digital image data equivalent to the policies for protection of hard-copy stor -
age media to preserve imaging records.
Security
Teleradiology systems should provide network and software security protocols to 
protect the confidentiality of patients’ identification and image data consistent with 
federal and state legal requirements. There should be measures to safeguard the data 
and to ensure integrity against intentional or unintentional corruption of the data.
Reliability and Redundancy
Quality patient care may depend on timely availability of the image interpreta -
tion. Written policies and procedures should be in place to ensure continuity of 
teleradiology services at a level consistent with those for hard-copy imaging studies 
and medical records within a facility or institution. This should include internal 
redundancy systems, backup communication links, and a disaster plan.
Licensing and Credentialing
Physicians who provide the official interpretation of images transmitted by telera -
diology should maintain licensure as may be required for provisions of radiologic 
service at both the transmitting and receiving sites. When providing the official 
interpretation of images from a hospital, the physician should be credentialed and 
obtain appropriate privileges at the institution. These physicians should consult 
86634.indb   138 8/4/08   8:42:48 AM

===== pdf p158 =====
Medicolegal Concerns for Teleradiology  n  139
with their professional liability carrier to ensure coverage at both the sending and 
receiving sites, to include the state or jurisdiction.
The physician performing the official interpretation is responsible for the qual -
ity of the images being reviewed. The ACR Rules of Ethics state: “It is proper for a 
diagnostic radiologist to provide a consultative opinion on radiographs and other 
images regardless of their origin. A diagnostic radiologist should regularly interpret 
radiographs and other images only when the radiologist reasonably participates in 
the quality of medical imaging, utilization review, and matters of policy that affect 
the quality of patient care.”
Images stored at either site (transmitting or receiving) should meet the juris -
dictional requirements of the transmitting site. Jurisdictional requirements refer 
to federal, state, and local statutes. Images interpreted offsite need not be stored at 
the receiving facility, provided they are stored at the transmitting site. However, if 
images are retained at the receiving site, the retention period for that jurisdiction 
must be met as well. The policy on record retention should be in writing. The phy-
sicians who are involved in practicing teleradiology will conduct their practice in 
a manner consistent with the bylaws, rules, and regulations for patient care at the 
transmitting site.
Documentation
Communication is a critical component of teleradiology. Physicians interpreting 
teleradiology examinations should render reports in accordance with the ACR 
Standard for Communication: Diagnostic Radiology.
Quality Control and Improvement, Safety, Infection 
Control, and Patient Education Concerns
Policies and procedures related to quality, patient education, infection control, and 
safety should be developed and implemented in accordance with the ACR policies 
on Quality Control and Improvement, Safety, Infection Control, and Patient Edu-
cation Concerns appearing in the ACR Standards Book.
Any facility using a teleradiology system must have documented policies and pro-
cedures for monitoring and evaluating the effective management, safety, and proper 
performance of acquisition, digitization, compression, transmission, archiving, and 
retrieval functions of the system. The quality control program should be designed 
to maximize the quality and accessibility of diagnostic information.
A test image, such as the SMPTE (Society of Motion Picture and Television 
Engineers) test pattern (SMPTE test pattern RP 133-1991, from Grey, J.F., Lisk, 
K.G., Haddick, D.H., et al., 1985. Test pattern for video displays and hard copy 
cameras. Radiolog y 154: 519–527), should be captured, transmitted, archived, 
86634.indb   139 8/4/08   8:42:48 AM

===== pdf p159 =====
140  n  Medicolegal Issues for Diagnostic Imaging Professionals
retrieved, and displayed at appropriate intervals, but at least monthly, to test the 
overall operation of the system under conditions that simulate the normal opera -
tion of the system. As a spatial resolution test, at least 512 × 512 resolution should 
be confirmed for small matrix official interpretation, and 2.5 lp/mm resolutions for 
large matrix official interpretation.
As a test of the display, SMPTE pattern data files sized to occupy the full area 
used to display images on the monitor should be displayed. The overall SMPTE 
image appearance should be inspected to assure the absence of gross artifacts, such 
as blurring or bleeding of bright display areas into dark areas, or aliasing of spatial 
resolution patterns. Display monitors used for primary interpretation should be 
tested at least monthly. As a dynamic range test, both the 5 and the 95 percent areas 
should be seen as distinct from the respective adjacent 0 and 100 percent areas. The 
use of teleradiology does not reduce the responsibilities for the management and 
supervision of radiologic medicine.
(Reprinted pp. 135–142 with permission of the American College of Radiol -
ogy. ACR Standard for Teleradiology  listed in the Web site: http://med.mc.ntw.edu.
tw/~somed/teletea/document/teleradiology_standard.html)
Legal Issues in Teleradiology
According to P. White in the article titled, “Legal Issues in Teleradiology-Distance 
Thoughts,” BJR, 75: 202, 2002, legal issues may evolve with regards to liability, 
responsibility, accountability, and duty of care. The doctor–patient relationship 
is different in cases of teleradiology than with face-to-face consultations. In civil 
cases, a duty of care is usually owed if a patient has been accepted by the defendant 
and if issues of proximity and foreseeability can be established. When a patient 
requests medical services and a doctor undertakes to provide these services, then 
the legal relationship of doctor and patient will ensue. In teleradiology, it could be 
argued that the physician merely acts as a consultant and, therefore, has minimal 
contact with the patient. How the legal process would differentiate between such 
relationships is yet to be tested; however, what is clear is that the physician–patient 
relationship, with respect to proximity and responsibility, will need careful consid -
eration. It will be important to clarify who maintains overall responsibility for the 
patient under these circumstances and, if, for example, clinical negligence is estab -
lished, how liability would be apportioned according to the roles of the concerned 
parties.
Case law in Diana L. Webb v. T.D. & C.H.A.,  No. 97-255, 951 P.2d, 1008; 
1997, the Supreme Court of Montana, has already considered whether a physician 
who performs a medical examination of an individual at the request of a third 
party has a duty of care to the examinee and, if so, what the scope of that duty is. 
The defendant, in this case, claimed that he owed no duty of care, as he had no 
physician–patient relationship with the claimant. The Supreme Court judges held 
86634.indb   140 8/4/08   8:42:48 AM

===== pdf p160 =====
Medicolegal Concerns for Teleradiology  n  141
that the healthcare provider has a duty to exercise ordinary care to assure that when 
he/she advises an examinee about their condition following an independent exami-
nation, the advice comports with the standard of care for the healthcare provider’s 
profession. It has also been suggested that if the radiologist’s report becomes an 
official part of the patient’s record, then it would be very unlikely that the court 
would find that no doctor–patient relationship had been established.
In Bienz v. Central Suffolk Hospital , 557 N.Y.S.2d, 139 (App. 1993), the court 
observed that if a doctor offers advice, treatment, or diagnosis over the telephone, 
a doctor–patient relationship is established. Therefore, the courts have developed a 
set of five questions to determine if a doctor–patient relationship exists:
 1. Was there a meeting between the doctor and patient?
 2. Did the doctor examine the patient?
 3. Did the doctor review the patient’s records?
 4. Did the doctor know the patient’s name?
 5. Did the patient pay the doctor for services?
Only some of these questions must be answered in the affirmative in order to 
establish a doctor–patient relationship (Sivaswamy, R., et al. 2002. Doctors on the 
Internet—Legal and practical implications Eubios Journal of Asian and Interna -
tional Bioethics 12, 185–188).
In Lopez v. Aziz , 852, S.W.2d, 303 (Texas App. 1993), a doctor–patient rela -
tionship was not found when a consulting obstetrician talked to the patient’s 
regular physician by phone. The court noted that because Aziz did not contact 
or examine Mrs. Lopez directly, and only spoke with her doctor, no relationship 
existed. Conversely, a relationship was found in Wheeler v. Yettie Kersting Memo -
rial Hospital, 866, S.W.2d, 32 (Texas, APP. 1993), where an on-call physician used 
information obtained by phone regarding the status of a woman in labor to send 
the woman to a hospital. Because the doctor evaluated the patient’s condition and 
recommended treatment over the telephone, the court found that a doctor–patient 
relationship existed. Even though a patient may not be in the same room with a 
doctor, a relationship may still be formed by the use of telemedicine to diagnose or 
treat a patient. A related problem is in determining where malpractice liability lies 
in a telemedicine scenario. There is a problem in determining joint or independent 
liability for all the physicians involved, the referring physician who is at the same 
location as the patient, and the physician consulting via telemedicine (Sivaswamy 
et al. 2002).
Case laws will suggest that a doctor’s participation in telemedicine consultations, 
whether or not his or her advice is followed, establishes a doctor–patient relationship. 
In Greenberg v. Perkins, 845, P.2d, 530 (Colorado, 1993), the court held that even if 
a traditional doctor–patient relationship is not present, a physician who examines a 
nonpatient still has a duty not to cause harm to the person being examined.
Another issue related to teleradiology malpractice involves the applicable juris -
diction in which the lawsuit should be filed. In a situation where there exists a 
86634.indb   141 8/4/08   8:42:48 AM

===== pdf p161 =====
142  n  Medicolegal Issues for Diagnostic Imaging Professionals
transboundary consultation, the question of jurisdiction becomes important. 
Therefore, to determine jurisdiction, courts must first determine where the practice 
of medicine was committed. Exercising personal jurisdiction is contingent on two 
requirements. First, in International Shoe Co. v. Washington , 326, U.S. 310 (1945),.
a nonresident defendant must have purposefully availed himself of the benefits and 
protections of the state by establishing minimum contracts with the state. Second, 
in Asahi Metal Indus. Co. v. Superior Court,  480, U.S. 102 (1987), exercising such 
jurisdiction must not offend traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice.
In Wright v. Yackley,  459, F. 2d, 287 (9th Cir. 1972), a malpractice action 
involving an Idaho patient and a South Dakota doctor resulted in a ruling that 
proper jurisdiction lay in South Dakota because all diagnoses and prescriptions 
were made in that state. The patient, a former South Dakota resident, could not 
claim Idaho jurisdiction because the malpractice action arose from the confirma -
tion of an old prescription. However, the court noted that had the treatment been a 
new one rather than the continuance of a prior visit, the jurisdiction of the patient’s 
state might also be controlling. The court ultimately ruled that the focus must be 
on the place where services are rendered. Based on such rulings, a doctor practicing 
telemedicine may need to be aware of laws and regulations in other states that may 
have jurisdiction over his activities, particularly in the area of physician licensing 
(Sivaswamy et al. 2002).
Clinical negligence comes under the auspices of tort law, whereby private or 
personal injury to a person or property may result in damages being claimed in 
a court of law. The civil law provides for compensation to a person injured by 
another’s negligence, and this is the usual avenue of redress for patient’s taking legal 
action within the healthcare system. The patient will claim that the doctor was neg-
ligent because of breach of duty to exercise reasonable care and skill in diagnosing, 
advising, or treating the patient.
In conventional radiology, the radiologist must examine the patient, if neces -
sary; however, in teleradiology, the radiologist may also have a duty to warn the 
patient that the lack of opportunity to physically examine the patient may increase 
the risk of misdiagnosis. Fundamentally, there are four models in teleradiology, 
which are
 1. Telediagnosis: Typically, this service involves asynchronous point-to-point 
communication and requires relatively simple applications and a minimum 
of infrastructure. In response to a request by a remote site, which transmits all 
or selected images of a diagnostic examination, specialists at a major medical 
center review these images and return a diagnostic report to the requesting 
site. Telediagnosis is particularly useful for rural and other areas that are not 
well served by specialized medical personnel.
 2. Telemonitoring: In most modern diagnostic imaging procedures, patient 
positioning and the process of image acquisition are important factors deter -
mining diagnostic image quality. Telemonitoring serves the need for expert 
86634.indb   142 8/4/08   8:42:49 AM

===== pdf p162 =====
Medicolegal Concerns for Teleradiology  n  143
supervision of image acquisition by a specific imaging modality. Further -
more, an expert can manipulate and view image data during the examination, 
therefore, being able to request additional images after issuing instructions 
on how to reposition the patient or adjust the imaging parameters. Tele -
monitoring does not impose heavy demands on the application layer, as the 
transactions between different sites are of a simple nature. Specifically, video 
sequences of the examination room and the patient are transmitted to the 
expert who monitors the procedure and interacts with the examination site 
through an image and voice data link. However, the requirement for real-
time multimedia communication imposes additional technological demands 
on the available infrastructure.
 3. Teleconsultation: In recent years, the number and complexity of biologi -
cal signals, which can be recorded and also presented in the form of recon -
structed images, has increased substantially. This has given rise to the need 
for subspecialization, which has resulted in an increased demand for consul -
tation among different medical experts. Providing a shared workplace among 
medical experts at remote and distant locations is one of the main func -
tions of the teleconsultation service. This service requires the synchronous 
viewing and manipulation of the same set of radiological images and other 
patient data, as well as the real-time exchange of comments among all parties 
involved in the session. It is evident that the synchronization of the media 
and procedures involved in a teleconsultation session requires various types 
of complex transactions and resource management mechanisms, therefore, 
imposing serious demands on the underlying applications. Furthermore, the 
real-time nature of the service and the volume of multimedia data exchange 
require a technologically advanced infrastructure.
 4. Telemanagement: The combination of advanced telemonitoring and telecon-
sultation services, with remote resource sharing, offers the possibility for the 
telematic management of diagnostic and therapeutic procedures. This telera -
diology service will gain momentum in the future with parallel developments 
in the areas of virtual reality, 3D video communications, and telepresence. It 
may then become possible for teleradiology to also support remote diagnostic 
imaging examinations, as well as image-guided radiation therapy and surgery 
(Excerpts from Orphanoudakis et al. 1996).
Data acquisition and manipulation issues are key factors for consideration in 
terms of image quality and diagnosis. The development of digital imaging has 
required radiologists to adopt new skills to overcome the potential for image deg -
radation during the process of digitization and transmission of nondigital images. 
However, there is a responsibility to ensure that the equipment is fit for the purpose 
for which it is used. From a legal standpoint, it would be negligent to produce and 
examine images of substandard quality by reason of inferior equipment or result -
ing from variable operator dependency, such as lack of experience in interpreting 
86634.indb   143 8/4/08   8:42:49 AM

===== pdf p163 =====
144  n  Medicolegal Issues for Diagnostic Imaging Professionals
images by these methods. Consequently, any errors in diagnosis arising from such 
practice may be entitled to compensation. Therefore, the advantages of teleradiol -
ogy are only relevant if images are of sufficient quality without significant loss of 
spatial or contrast resolution from image acquisition through transmission to final 
image display.
There have always been questions regarding the accuracy of diagnosis with 
digital imaging and how this may impact on the malpractice issues of teleradiol -
ogy. There have been major advancements in film digitization; however, it must 
be decided in a court of law whether there has been any degradation of the image 
during image transmission, and whether this has impacted on the accuracy of the 
diagnosis. There may be further concerns that the operators of the digital process 
may also lack the experience to achieve the optimal viewing conditions and, in this 
case, the defendants would have to establish their competence to use the equip -
ment. It has been consistently held in case law that inexperience is no defense for 
clinical negligence or malpractice.
If the patient were to establish, on a balance of probabilities, that the defendant’s 
failure to promptly provide treatment would have accentuated the harm suffered 
and represented breach of duty, then the patient would be entitled to compensation 
for the harm that occurred. It would not be too unrealistic to argue that digital 
radiology should speed up the reporting process in situations where the images 
need to be sent to a radiologist or specialist at a distant site.
To reduce exposure to malpractice liability, the participants in the teleradiology 
network should consider creating written policies that address the following:
 1. Have adequate and appropriate documentation. The local and consulting 
providers document and record the patients’ histories, examination, diagno -
sis, treatments, and recommendations.
 2. Providers should clarify and document the equipment to be used, the parties 
responsible for equipment maintenance, the format of transmitting medical 
information, the studies to be interpreted, the hours of coverage, the fre -
quency and format of reports, quality assurance mechanisms, and important 
staffing issues. The duties and responsibilities of each party involved, in a 
teleradiology arrangement, should be clearly defined in a written contract. 
Indemnification provisions also should be included.
 3. Practitioners providing medical services through teleradiology must meet 
the standard of care (the national standard of care) associated with the 
type of service provided and the standard of care for providing those ser -
vices via telecommunications.
 4. Transmission verification procedures should be established at both the local 
and remote sites.
 5. Create contingency plans. Every provider should have a written policy or 
guidelines establishing a course of action for emergencies, including when 
86634.indb   144 8/4/08   8:42:49 AM

===== pdf p164 =====
Medicolegal Concerns for Teleradiology  n  145
there is a power outage, equipment malfunction, or other unforeseen incident 
that interferes with the teleradiology network.
 6. The network should promulgate clinical guidelines and protocols. These 
guidelines and protocols should be realistic. If the practitioner or entity fails 
to meet these guidelines or protocols, such failure may support a finding by 
the court that there was a deviation from the proper standard of care.
 7. Regarding record storage, retention, and maintenance, the teleradiology busi-
ness must comply with the federal and state law requirements.
 8. Each party involved in the teleradiology network should be required to carry 
insurance in the event of an error or malfunction. Teleradiology consultants 
should confirm whether their professional liability insurance policies cover 
liability in the patients’ states for services provided from outside these states 
via teleradiology.
 9. Teleradiology entities should ensure that their employees and independent 
contractors are properly credentialed, privileged, and accredited with respect 
to their abilities to provide medical care and to use telemedical equipment.
 10. The providers should thoroughly investigate the vendors providing the hard -
ware and software products and services to determine if they are sound and 
experienced, and whether they honor their support and maintenance con -
tracts and provide appropriate training. Because the practitioners will most 
likely be held liable for patient harm resulting from failing to use the telera -
diology equipment reasonably, the practitioner should routinely inspect the 
equipment to make sure it functions properly, confirm that the vendor will 
service and maintain the equipment on an ongoing basis, and ensure that the 
system will permit the patients’ records to be reasonably protected and allow 
the practitioner to obtain patient information during a system failure.
 11. The vendor’s responsibility should be identified in writing and include what 
services are to be provided, upgrades, costs, training, maintenance, support, 
and indemnification.
(Excerpts from Cepelwicz, B.B. June 2003. Telelegalities. Journal of Imaging 
Technologies Management. Web site: http://www.imagingeconomics.com/library/
tools/printengine.asp?printArticleID=200306-13)
Security and Confidentiality
The management of medical records, including radiographic film and other hard -
copy images, may be an additional problem with teleradiology and computerized 
patient records. Security issues relating to increased risk of improper disclosure of 
records, breach of confidentiality, access to records, alteration or elimination of 
records from a remote site, vulnerability of computer-stored data to accidental era -
sure, and methods of ensuring verification are the concerns that must be addressed. 
There are three issues relating to data security. They include:
86634.indb   145 8/4/08   8:42:49 AM

===== pdf p165 =====
146  n  Medicolegal Issues for Diagnostic Imaging Professionals
 1. Privacy, which determines who can access the data security
 2. Authenticity, which determines who sends the data
 3. Integrity, which determines whether the data has been altered during its 
transmission through public networks
It has been suggested that the first two issues are the responsibility of the data 
centers or technology services of the sender and the receiver. Privacy and authentic-
ity can be resolved using various levels of passwords, based on a balance between 
convenience and cost. Integrity is the responsibility of the site where the image is 
generated and this may not be so easy to protect. Encryption of data is one method 
to protect the data. However, there is a concern about the security of data held on 
a computer and transmitted between sites. To protect individuals, it is essential to 
remove personal identifiers or to encrypt transmitted information.
The law has not been able to keep pace with teleradiology and is a testing ground 
for many legal and practical issues. Nevertheless, some states have formulated laws 
governing these issues. California requires licensed providers who use electronic 
systems to comply with certain regulations, including offsite backup data storage 
systems, safeguards for confidentiality and unauthorized access, authentication by 
electronic signature keys, and guidelines for system maintenance (Excerpts from 
White, P. 2002).
Political Considerations and Turf Issues
Teleradiology is mired with turf battles and intermedicine conflicts. Some radiolo -
gists fear that managed care plans will use teleradiology to establish networks that 
would shut out local radiologists, or that hospitals may replace local radiologists 
with out-of-state teleradiology groups. These fears are fueled by the emergence of 
teleradiology companies that have been formed to offer their services, often in com-
petition with local radiologists, in both rural and metropolitan areas throughout 
the United States. Such fears are reinforced by a recent Wall Street Journal  article 
that reported the creation of a joint venture between a Texas-based university and 
a communications company that will take advantage of a diverging trend in medi -
cine, including the rise of managed care and the development of technology that 
will enable the delivery of high quality, digitized x-ray images (Excerpts from Ber -
lin, L. 1998. Malpractice issues in radiology, American Journal of Radiology , 170: 
1417–1422).
In an article titled, Teleradiology by Lee, C.D., from Radiology, 1996, 201: 15, 
a California radiologist reported that a few powerful and greedy individuals and 
groups are destroying practices of local community or rural radiologists under the 
guise of being able to offer a better and, in some cases, more economical service. 
They are not able to interact with clinicians, attend medical staff and commu -
nity meetings, or perform other hospital functions. W. J. Casarella, established 
in Benefits of Teleradiology (1996) from Radiology, 201: 16–17, that teleradiology 
86634.indb   146 8/4/08   8:42:49 AM

===== pdf p166 =====
Medicolegal Concerns for Teleradiology  n  147
allows the transmission of images in difficult cases to those members of a group best 
trained to interpret them. He indicated that teleradiology is here, it works, and it 
will only get easier, better, and cheaper (Excerpts from Berlin, L. 1998).
Suspicion that teleradiologic groups will place the livelihood of local radiolo -
gists in jeopardy cannot be denied among segments of the radiologic community. 
Mistrust and animosity are natural consequences of such suspicions. However, the 
continued growth of teleradiology is likely to generate increasing ferocity of turf 
battles among radiologists.
Teleradiology is an offspring of the computer age. Technologic innovations in 
acquiring and transmitting radiologic images have propelled teleradiology from an 
uncertain infancy to a proven approach. The increasing use and expanding appli -
cations of teleradiology are likely to continue in an unabated fashion; however, at 
the same time, they are likely to be accompanied by a corresponding growth of 
malpractice litigations, such as medical licensure, physician–patient relationships, 
accuracy, jurisdiction, standards, and turf battles.
Review Questions
 1. What are the goals of teleradiology?
 1. Provide consultive service.
 2. Facilitate radiology interpretations in on-call situations.
 3. Provide subspecialty support.
 4. Provide supervision of onsite imaging studies.
 a. 1 and 2
 b. 3 and 4
 c. 1, 2, and 3
 d. 1, 2, 3, and 4
 2. When using a small matrix size, what is the minimum pixel depth required 
for processing the teleradiographic image at the display monitor?
 a. 2-bit
 b. 8-bit
 c. 10-bit
 d. 12-bit
 3. What individual must be qualified to assess and provide problem-solving 
input to assure sustainable high image quality and system function?
 a. Radiologic technologist
 b. Medical physicist
 c. Physician
 d. Image management specialist
86634.indb   147 8/4/08   8:42:49 AM

===== pdf p167 =====
148  n  Medicolegal Issues for Diagnostic Imaging Professionals
 4. The quality control program should be designed to maximize the quality and 
accessibility of diagnostic information.
 a. True
 b. False
86634.indb   148 8/4/08   8:42:49 AM

===== pdf p168 =====
149
Chapter 12
Forensic Radiology
Upon completion of Chapter 12, the reader will be able to:
 1. Apply radiographic technique to determine cause of death.
 2. Define battered child syndrome.
 3. Identify signs of child abuse.
 4. Discuss the legal implications toward child abuse.
Forensic Radiology
The first forensic use of radiology in locating metallic objects in criminal cases was 
done in January, 1896, four months after Wilhelm Roentgen discovered the x-ray.
A Mrs. Hartley of Nelson, England, was shot in the head by her hus -
band who then drowned himself in the Liverpool canal. He fired four 
shots into the head of his wife. Doctor William Little, general practi -
tioner, and Arthur Schuster, physics professors at Owens College in 
Manchester, tried to locate the bullets utilizing the newly discovered 
roentgen ray (x-ray).
The first exposure was noted as taking one hour in duration and the 
second exposure, 70 minutes. Dr. Schuster developed the bariumplatano-
cide plates and located three bullets inside the cranium of Mrs. Hartley.
The procedure that Dr. Schuster performed was using the Crooks’ 
tube. He brought three tubes to the house; he had two tubes as spares. 
He had a DC generator and glass photographic plates. There was no 
86634.indb   149 8/4/08   8:42:49 AM

===== pdf p169 =====
150  n  Medicolegal Issues for Diagnostic Imaging Professionals
main electricity. The local company provided storage batteries to pro -
vide power.
According to documentation, one of the assistants to Dr. Schus -
ter suffered a nervous breakdown attributed to the radiograph of the 
mutilated and dying woman. It took a total of 10 days to set up the 
apparatus and radiograph Mrs. Hartley. She died on May 9, 1896, 15 
days after receiving the gunshot wounds.
This is documented in the Nelson and Colne Express, which was the 
local newspaper (Knight and Evans, 1981).
Forensic radiology is used to:
 1. Determine whether bones are actually present, whether they are human, and 
to determine basic features, such as age, sex, and stature.
 2. Compare two sets of radiographs, antemortem versus postmortem views. A 
person’s fingerprints are not the only parts of the anatomy that can be used 
for investigative purposes. Both dental and skeletal films are useful because 
no two person’s teeth or skeletons are exactly alike. Forensic dentistry is com-
paring antemortem and postmortem dental films. This is the best known and 
widely used technique in forensic medicine. Almost everyone has had dental 
x-rays taken within the past five years, and the teeth are among the best pre -
served of the body parts, even in a fire. Apart from the teeth and jaws, the 
most helpful part of the body for comparison radiography is the skull. The 
skull has many characteristic features, especially the paranasal sinuses. Other 
useful features are peculiarities of bony architecture and unique trabecular 
patterns. The cervical spine, vascular grooves, clavicle, lumbar spine, skeletal 
deformities, angulations, callus formation, congenital abnormalities, unique 
abnormalities, such as a dorsal defect of the patella, and the ossification pat -
terns in the costal cartilage of the first rib are good areas for comparison.
 3. Identify bodies with previous antemortem injuries. An old chest film may 
be the only antemortem x-ray available on a John or Jane Doe. However, 
in the upper corner of that film might be an old fracture of the clavicle that 
can be compared to the body in question. Foreign bodies, such as old bul -
lets or shrapnel, are also helpful. Besides anatomical differences, prosthetics, 
synthetic joints, hip replacement, pacemakers, surgical implants, and disease 
processes make for easy identification.
Determining Cause of Death
Radiographic imaging techniques are also helpful in determining cause of death. 
Death caused by a penetrating wound, strangulation, drowning, electrical shock, 
metallic poison, and/or blast injuries can be easily determined radiographically. In 
86634.indb   150 8/4/08   8:42:50 AM

===== pdf p170 =====
Forensic Radiology  n  151
multiple-injury cases, radiographs will enable the radiologists to discover which 
wound was fatal. If a large caliber shotgun wound is made to the head, the skull 
will fracture and there is massive brain trauma.
Imaging Techniques
Plain film radiography is the imaging technique most commonly employed by 
forensic radiologists for identification and/or discovering the cause of death. Other 
imaging modalities are used in special circumstances.
A fluoroscopic unit can be employed by the medical examiner to recover for -
eign objects, such as needles and bullets, from bodies. Angiography is used to 
study vessel injuries. This is especially useful when investigating “surgical mis -
adventures” and other iatrogenic problems. It is a law in San Francisco that all 
patients who die unexpectedly in hospitals must be examined by the coroner. All 
tubes and other equipment must be left in place. The bodies are studied for tube 
ruptures, catheter perforations, and other possible causes of death, often with the 
aid of angiography.
Forensic angiographic techniques must be modified slightly when working 
on corpses because of the absence of blood circulation and washout, which is the 
elimination of the contrast agent. Positional and scout films are taken to define the 
region of interest. Because there is no washout, only one injection of media contrast 
is possible, making it vital that the procedure be done properly.
A large load of contrast is delivered via pressure injector in one end of the vessels 
under examination and pumped out at the other end. Utilizing large amounts of 
contrast media will produce very clear and useful images. Most medical examiners 
and forensic radiologists use imaging equipment at county hospitals or employ the 
services of portable x-ray companies. If hospital facilities are used for forensic stud -
ies, the areas are disinfected after use.
Battered Child Syndrome
Radiology can play a vital role in the confirmation of the diagnosis of child abuse. 
Clinical examinations may reveal evidence of neglect, but a carefully conducted 
radiological exam can disclose not only the etiology of bone lesions, but may give 
information on the approximate ages, number, and sites of bone abnormalities.
Battered child syndrome is defined as the radiologic appearance of bizarre 
and unusual injuries of the bones in affected children. These presumably result 
from repetitive trauma due to unawareness or deliberate denial on the part of 
those responsible. Radiographic evidence of the battered child syndrome, such 
as fractures of different ages in the same child, is accepted proof of abuse by the 
courts.
86634.indb   151 8/4/08   8:42:50 AM

===== pdf p171 =====
152  n  Medicolegal Issues for Diagnostic Imaging Professionals
Perhaps the most telling sign of abuse is multiple skeletal injuries at different 
stages of healing. Classical radiographic findings indicating nonaccidental injuries 
are epiphyseal and metaphyseal fractures. Injuries to the metaphysis, and spiral and 
transverse fractures of the long bones may result from swinging the baby or child 
and forcefully wrenching or twisting the limbs.
Uncommon fracture sites, such as the lateral end of the clavicle, are usually 
encountered only following perinatal trauma or child abuse. Shaking or twisting 
probably produces such an injury. Sternal and scapular fractures are also suspect, 
as is thickening of the cortex and of periosteal elevation. Rib fractures are also 
uncommon in childhood. Such fractures are frequently bilateral due to side-to-side 
pressure from adult hands grasping the child around the thorax and squeezing dur-
ing shaking.
Brain trauma, subdural hematoma, and cerebral edema are the most com -
mon serious and urgent complications of nonaccidental skull injuries. This is often 
caused by whiplash from shaking the child. Radiography can provide supportive 
evidence for subdural hematoma by demonstrating separated cranial bones and 
widened sutures, other signs of increased intracranial pressure, or obvious fractures 
of the cranial bones.
Other suspicious head injuries include absence of hair or hemorrhaging beneath 
the scalp due to vigorous hair pulling, retinal hemorrhages, and jaw and nasal frac -
tures. Abdominal injuries compose about 25 percent of the total injuries in child 
abuse. Injuries include duodenal and jejunal hematomas, rupture of the inferior 
vena cava, splenic rupture, renal rupture, gastric rupture, perforation of both intra- 
and extraperitoneal organs, peritonitis, soft tissue edema, intramural hematomas 
of the alimentary tract, pancreatic injury, pancreatitis, and general bruising, all of 
which can be documented by radiography.
Plain films of the abdomen reveal free gas or fluid in the peritoneal cavity or 
signs of peritonitis. Other radiographic evidence of visceral trauma includes pneu -
moperitoneum and/or ileus.
It must be remembered that suspicious injuries can be caused by other condi -
tions. Some diseases also mimic abuse, such as scurvy, osteogenesis imperfecta, 
congenital syphilis, and infantile cortical hyperostosis.
The radiographer can gain useful information for the doctor by producing good 
quality radiographs for diagnostic interpretation. More importantly, the radiogra -
pher can gain the confidence of the child by being caring, honest, and friendly. In a 
friendly environment, the child may state the truth in how he/she was injured. The 
child may respond to questions better if he/she is not frightened when he/she enters 
the radiology department.
State laws require healthcare providers to report abuse to a child protection 
agency, such as the police or sheriff’s department, county probation, or county wel-
fare department. The Child Abuse Reporting Law specifically provides that neither 
the physician–patient privilege nor the psychotherapist–patient privilege applies 
86634.indb   152 8/4/08   8:42:50 AM

===== pdf p172 =====
Forensic Radiology  n  153
to any information reported pursuant to this law. Not only is failure to report a 
criminal offense, but it is also a grave breach of professional responsibility to both 
the child and parent.
Hospital staff, including radiographers, should be familiar with the indicators 
of child abuse. Medical personnel should also be alert to “hospital shoppers.” These 
are people who, for no apparent reason, have brought an injured child to a hos -
pital outside of their community when their own community has fully equipped 
facilities. Often, this is done to cover up a pattern of abuse because medical records 
sometimes reveal a history of hospital and doctor “shopping” that may, in conjunc-
tion with other indicators, be indicative of suspected abuse.
According to the law, specified medical personnel or their agents may take skel-
etal x-rays of a child for purposes of diagnosing and determining the extent of 
possible child abuse without the consent of the parent or guardian. Medical profes-
sionals and other mandated reporters may be subject to civil damage suits if they 
fail to report suspected child abuse.
In the case of Landeros v. Flood (1976) Cal. 3d 399, an infant, Gina, was brought 
into a hospital with injuries, treated and released back to her mother. Subsequently, 
she was treated for new and more serious injuries by a second doctor, who reported 
the injuries as suspected child abuse. The child was made a dependent of the court 
and a guardian ad litem was appointed. The guardian ad litem then instituted a suit 
on behalf of the child against the first doctor for failure to report as required by law. 
The California Supreme Court reversed a lower court decision, which dismissed the 
complaint, and held that the complaint stated a cause of action based on a failure 
to report as required by statute. The case held that failure to perform the statuto -
rily imposed duty to report raises a presumption that a defendant doctor failed to 
exercise due care. The Supreme Court sent the case back to the lower court for trial. 
The plaintiffs in this case sued the doctor for $2 million, plus costs. A decision for 
the plaintiffs would obviously have been serious for the doctor involved. In spite of 
the ultimate outcome of this case (the charges could not be substantiated), it is clear 
that health practitioners and other healthcare providers who have a statutory duty 
to report may be held civilly as well as criminally liable when they fail to report 
suspected cases as required by law.
The importance of law enforcement’s role in child abuse cases centers on the fact 
that child abuse is a crime, and that the primary consideration is for the protection 
of the child. Reports of suspected child abuse must be made to the police or sheriff’s 
departments, or other designated child protective agencies. Law enforcement per -
sonnel are also best trained to ensure protection of constitutional rights and due 
process procedures during the course of the investigation.
The responding officer will decide whether to take the child into temporary 
custody, to arrest the parents/caretakers, to seek the filing of criminal charges, or to 
refer the case to child welfare services or another appropriate agency. Final disposi -
tion should be made after consultation with representatives of other disciplines.
86634.indb   153 8/4/08   8:42:50 AM

===== pdf p173 =====
154  n  Medicolegal Issues for Diagnostic Imaging Professionals
As in all other areas of criminal law, all searches, seizures, and arrests made in 
the course of child abuse investigations must comply with the requirements of the 
Fourth Amendment.
According to the U.S. Department of Human Services, Administration for 
Children and Families reported in 2005 that 803,000 children were victims of 
child abuse. These figures make it necessary that healthcare professionals, including 
radiographers, become more aware of abnormalities that may point toward child 
abuse.
86634.indb   154 8/4/08   8:42:50 AM