
===== pdf p78 =====
59
Chapter 5
Risk Management 
and Liability
Upon completion of Chapter 5, the reader will be able to:
 1. Define liability.
 2. Apply the doctrine of corporate negligence to the legal case of Darling v. 
Charleston Community Hospital.
 3. Recognize the responsibility of the professional staff.
 4. Discuss the Good Samaritan Laws.
 5. Explain hospital liability and malpractice.
 6. Assess the importance of patient injury reporting and recording.
Liability
Excerpted from the weekly newsmagazine R.T. Image, Facing the Risk, August 
10, 1992:
The physician opens the lead-lined door and steps onto the brightly 
lit hallway. The act and its required effort were harder this time — it 
always is when one must face the family.
In the waiting room, she sees that the hospital chaplain has arrived. 
A quick glance before turning to the parents. Their faces are ashen, 
yet it’s their eyes she hates the most. For without saying a word, the 
86634.indb   59 8/4/08   8:42:37 AM

===== pdf p79 =====
60  n  Medicolegal Issues for Diagnostic Imaging Professionals
dire nonverbal messages had been conveyed. “No, your daughter is not 
dead,” the doctor says.
“During the examination, however, she experienced complications 
and she is now in a coma.”
What? How? Why? These are questions that demand answers. 
Questions that will be answered with compassion. Both the questions 
and the answers will never end.
“She had a seizure and went into cardiac arrest,” the physician 
explains. “We got her back, and now hope that she’ll respond further. 
You may see her for a few minutes. She is on a machine that assists her 
breathing. We’re doing everything we can.”
The kidney exam was necessary. Her right lower quadrant pain and 
work-up tests confirmed it. The IV was established. The questionnaire 
was completed. The patient’s history of hay fever and asthma, as well as 
the evening hour, called for nonionic contrast. The risks were known. 
Radiology personnel were ready for everything — except the physi -
cian’s response time.
The injection went smoothly. Following the initial film, the young 
female patient and the radiographer were talking about the previous 
night’s awards show. Then the grand mal hit. Its intensity peaked so 
rapidly that the radiographer had to grab the girl to keep her from 
vibrating off the table. The reaction tray was nearby, but the telephone 
was 10 feet away.
“The emergency room is just down the hall,” thought the radiographer. 
“And the ordering emergency room physician knows where we are.”
The patient’s strength was immense. Her gurgled sounds were worse 
in the radiographer’s ear. The enclosed room smothers the radiographer 
calls for help.
Then the tremors ceased as quickly as they had begun, being 
replaced by stillness and quiet. The radiographer raced to the telephone, 
calling the code.
Was time frozen or in slow motion, the radiographer wondered. 
How much time had elapsed? Where were they?
Finally the sounds of the team approached. Were they called 
soon enough?
This story, although fictional, is a concern for many radiographers who are per-
forming radiographic procedures without direct or immediate supervision from a 
physician. Hospital policy should dictate that the ordering physician or radiologist 
be present during the injection of contrast media and remain to monitor the patient 
for 10 minutes. The physician would then return if complications arose.
86634.indb   60 8/4/08   8:42:37 AM

===== pdf p80 =====
Risk Management and Liability  n  61
An acute care hospital/medical center is under the duty to exercise such rea -
sonable care in looking after and protecting the patient. The legal responsibility 
of any health practitioner is to be a practitioner of safe care. The following legal 
doctrine will provide insight into the ways in which the law fixes liability for acts 
of malpractice. Radiographers may be subjected to a greater exposure of liability 
based on various factors or principles of law, or the legal status of the employer or 
the employee.
Risk management is the process of avoiding or controlling risk of financial 
loss to the radiographers and the hospital or medical center. Risk management is a 
matter of patient safety. Poor quality care will create a risk of injury to patients and 
will lead to increased financial liability. Risk management is engaged in the protec-
tion of financial assets by managing insurance for potential liability by reducing 
liability through surveillance. Risk management will identify actual and potential 
causes of patient accidents and will implement programs to eliminate or reduce 
these occurrences.
Doctrine of Corporate Negligence
The doctrine of corporate negligence means that the hospital/medical center or 
healthcare agency as an entity is negligent. It is the failure of the corporation to fol-
low an established standard of conduct to which all healthcare corporations should 
conform in a given situation. The doctrine of corporate negligence or liability is 
relatively new. The determination of negligence is based on violations or breach of 
duty owed to the patient by the hospital/medical center or health center.
The famous landmark decision regarding corporate negligence was Darling v. 
Charleston Community Hospital,  211 N.E. Second 53 (Illinois), 1965. Darling, the 
plaintiff, was an 18-year-old college student who played on the football team. Dar-
ling was injured while playing football and was taken to the emergency room of 
Charleston Community Hospital. The doctor on emergency call on that particular 
day was a general practitioner. The physician took x-rays and diagnosed fractures 
of both bones below the knee in the right leg. The doctor reduced the fractures and 
applied a cast to the leg.
Darling complained of pain continuously. Three days after applying the cast, 
the general practitioner split the cast. Darling continued to complain of pain. There 
was evidence that circulation was impaired, and there was a foul odor at the area of 
the fracture. There were no orthopedic specialists consulted at any time. Approxi -
mately two weeks later, Darling was transferred to another hospital and given the 
care of an orthopedic doctor, but it was too late. The leg was amputated.
The most important issue decided in the case was the standard of care for deter-
mining hospital liability. The court found the hospital failed to meet the standard 
of care due to Darling, because neither consultation nor examination by skilled 
orthopedic surgeons were utilized, and there were insufficiently trained nurses 
86634.indb   61 8/4/08   8:42:37 AM

===== pdf p81 =====
62  n  Medicolegal Issues for Diagnostic Imaging Professionals
capable of recognizing the progressive gangrenous condition which resulted in the 
leg amputation. The court allowed the rules and regulations of the Illinois State 
Department of Health, the hospital licensing act, and the standards of the Joint 
Commission on the Accreditation of Hospitals to be introduced as evidence. The 
verdict against the hospital was $100,000. The physician settled prior to the trial for 
$40,000. The hospital was found liable under the doctrine of corporate negligence. 
The court stated, “The governing body of each hospital shall be responsible for the 
operation of the hospital, for the selection of medical staff, and for the quality of 
care rendered in the hospital.”
Responsibility of the Professional Staff
A physician is an independent contractor who alone is responsible for the exercise 
of professional skill and judgment. The staff physician is not subject to the control 
of the hospital/medical center. However, the hospital/medical center will assume 
all of the responsibility for the actions of the staff physician. The governing body of 
the hospital/medical center or healthcare center is the board of trustees. The board 
is charged with the right and the duty to monitor the quality of healthcare being 
provided by the professional staff. The board members must carefully scrutinize the 
reports submitted by the professional staff and must assure themselves that there is 
continuous review, analysis, and evaluation of patient care.
In California in 1974, Dr. Nork, an orthopedist, was found negligent in his care 
of at least 30 patients (Gonzales v. Nork, California Supreme Court, November 19, 
1973). The verdict was $3,710,447 of which $2,000,000 constituted punitive dam-
ages because Dr. Nork’s wanton, reckless disregard of the patients in his care.
The evidence in the case showed that the hospital, the medical staff, and the 
staff licensing board never took any action against Dr. Nork although they knew, 
or “should have known,” he was causing injury to his patients.
The suit was brought by Albert Gonzales. The facts briefly were that Gonzales 
was examined by Dr. Nork in November, 1967, for back pain. Dr. Nork diagnosed 
a herniated disc. A lumbar myelogram was done and was interpreted as normal. 
In spite of this and without consultation, Dr. Nork performed a laminectomy and 
spinal fusion on Gonzales. He complained of pain in his back, legs, and right thigh 
immediately after surgery. There were conflicting reports on Gonzales’ medical 
records. A November 30 report by Dr. Nork stated, “Patient had done extremely 
well, no complaints” (Hemelt and Mackert, 1982, p. 33). The nurses’ notes of the 
same date stated, “Ambulated with help for 10 minutes, had to be helped to the 
bathroom, complains of pain continuously, left leg felt paralyzed” (Hemelt and 
Mackert, 1982, p. 33). Gonzales became progressively worse and three years later 
became permanently disabled.
Mercy Hospital where Gonzales was a patient was also found liable for negli -
gence under the doctrine of corporate negligence. The court held that the hospital 
86634.indb   62 8/4/08   8:42:38 AM

===== pdf p82 =====
Risk Management and Liability  n  63
owed the patient a duty of care that included protecting the patient from acts of 
medical negligence by the hospital’s staff physicians. The words used were, “If the 
hospital knows, or has reason to know, or should have known such acts were likely 
to occur” (Hemelt and Mackert, 1982, p. 34). The court held that the hospital was 
corporately responsible for the conduct of the medical staff. The courts expect the 
hospitals to have policies and procedures to reasonably assure proper patient care 
and to take appropriate action against those who do not comply.
Doctor-Owned Hospital/Clinic Liability
There has been a recent surge of clinics and emergency care centers in operation. 
Under California State statutes, operation of a clinic owned by a physician will 
make him liable not only for his own acts, but also for the conduct of his employ -
ees (i.e., nurses, radiologic technologists, etc.). The law is very explicit about para -
medical personnel performing various acts above the legal jurisdiction. A radiologic 
technologist is not licensed to draw blood unless the individual has the appropriate 
phlebotomist certification on file with the State Department of Health Services. 
Nurses and/or medical assistants who have been ordered to perform radiographic 
procedures without the appropriate state licensure consider this a legal act. Many 
radiographers working in doctor-owned clinics and/or offices have indicated that 
as long as the physician gives his permission to perform duties that are beyond the 
scope and practice, it is permissible. Not so! Any duty out of the scope and practice 
of licensure is illegal since licensure is an authorization by a government agency 
to engage in a given occupation (refer to Chapter 10, p. 127). No job is worth 
doing something that could be a detriment to the patient, or to make an individual 
an accessory to a criminal act. It is imperative to make sure that you know the 
extent of malpractice for yourself when employed in a physician’s clinic/office. Most 
doctors may not have malpractice insurance for their employees due to the high 
insurance premiums. It would be advisable to have your own personal malpractice 
insurance, which can be purchased through the American Society of Radiologic 
Technologists.
Good Samaritan Laws
The main purpose of the Good Samaritan Laws was to encourage citizens to assist 
their fellow man by rendering emergency medical aid to injured persons. These laws 
were passed to protect the same citizens from civil or criminal liability for any acts 
or omissions resulting from attempts to give such emergency medical aid. These 
laws vary in the particular coverage from state to state. Some states limit coverage 
to healthcare professionals, while other states cover every citizen who gives emer -
gency aid.
86634.indb   63 8/4/08   8:42:38 AM

===== pdf p83 =====
64  n  Medicolegal Issues for Diagnostic Imaging Professionals
In spite of rumors or statements to the contrary, there are no reported cases of 
successful lawsuits against any physicians stopping to give emergency aid. There is 
still concern among healthcare professionals (i.e., radiographers) regarding poten -
tial liability in emergency situations. However, it is evident from the legislation 
passed that state legislators, in general, regard persons who give emergency care as 
a protected class. The individual who in good faith renders emergency care at the 
scene of an accident shall not be liable for any civil damages as a result of any acts or 
omissions in rendering emergency care. The first Good Samaritan Law was passed 
in California in 1959. Since that time, other states have followed California’s lead to 
include various categories of healthcare professionals such as radiographers.
Anyone may render aid in an emergency situation, but under English and 
American law, no one is forced to do so where there is no duty. If there is no rela -
tionship between parties involved, then no duty arises. On the other hand, if one 
elects to render assistance in an emergency, then one must meet certain standards 
of skill and competency. The essential element or test of malpractice is the “reason-
able man test.” What would a reasonable, prudent radiographer do in the particular 
circumstance? If the radiographer responded appropriately as a reasonable person 
and the standard of care has been met, there would be no negligence. It is the act of 
giving aid that creates a relationship between the victim and the Good Samaritan 
and, consequently, a duty arises to render due care.
It is also necessary to understand that the statutes do not immunize one from 
being sued. But if, and when, a person is sued, the defense of the Good Samaritan 
immunity would be raised to show that the individual being sued qualifies under 
the state Good Samaritan statute and is entitled to immunity (Hemelt and Mack -
ert, 1982, p. 51).
Hospital Liability and Malpractice
Hospital liability and malpractice insurance, also known as “patient liability insur -
ance,” is intended to cover all claims against the hospital arising out of alleged 
negligence of any member of the physician staff and/or employees. The usual kinds 
of insurance carried by a hospital include:
 1. Public liability
 2. Products and druggists liability
 3. Elevator liability
 4. Workers’ compensation
 5. Steam boiler insurance
 6. Sprinkler leakage
86634.indb   64 8/4/08   8:42:38 AM

===== pdf p84 =====
Risk Management and Liability  n  65
 7. Safe burglary protection
 8. Hospital liability
 9. Automobile personal injury
 10. Fidelity and surety bonds
 11. Fire insurance
 12. Electrical machinery
 13. Radium hazards
One hospital may have 10 different malpractice attorneys in adjusting claims 
and incidents, which may occur on a daily basis.
Injury Reporting and Recording
Hospital employees are instructed to report any injury to a patient to administra -
tion via the department manager and/or nursing supervisor, who, in turn, should 
report it immediately to the insurance carrier. Failure to give notice to the insur -
ance carrier, in the case of an injury, may be a good reason to disclaim the policy 
and may make it easier to award damages to the injured party in a legal case. Even 
when the hospital makes an investigation, and in good faith, relying on the inves -
tigation, concludes that there is no liability, or that the accident was too trivial to 
report, and makes no report, the hospital then acts at its own risk. The insurance 
carrier may cancel the policy and the hospital then is responsible for legal counsel 
and damages.
One Scenario
A patient was lying on the x-ray table and had her left hand underneath the table. 
She did not speak English, so communication was a bit difficult. The student tech -
nologist pushed the fluoroscopic tower up and out of the way and the patient’s 
middle finger was crushed under the roller wheels of the fluoroscopic tower. There 
was no visible injury, and she never mentioned that she was injured. The patient left 
the radiology department without reporting the injury to anyone. One week later, 
the radiology manager received a letter from the patient’s attorney with a copy of a 
letter from the orthopedic surgeon who had treated her broken finger. A negligence 
action suit was filed against the hospital, the student technologist, and the x-ray 
manufacturing company. Because there was no mention of an injury or incident 
report from the hospital, the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur applied in this case. The 
hospital paid damages to the patient of $3,750.18. Note: Make sure that you check 
the condition of the patient at all times, even at discharge.
86634.indb   65 8/4/08   8:42:38 AM

===== pdf p85 =====
66  n  Medicolegal Issues for Diagnostic Imaging Professionals
Vignette 11
Poor Patient Care Causes Back Injury
Frank Filter, a patient at Coulomb Memorial Medical 
Center, is scheduled for abdominal surgery. In a weak 
and frail state due to a long-term illness, Filter needed 
a special radiographic examination. When he arrived in 
the radiology department, he questioned the radiog -
rapher, Amy Afterglow, R.T., about the pending proce -
dure. She told him, rather abruptly, that his doctor had 
ordered the study and that, if he had any questions, he 
should ask his doctor. In a curt manner, Afterglow ques-
tioned Filter as to whether he wanted the study com -
pleted or not because there was no time to waste. Filter 
agreed to the procedure.
Filter was quickly and roughly pulled onto a cold, 
hard x-ray table. The jerky movement hurt his back. 
During the procedure, he was very uncomfortable due 
to the severe back pain. Filter had asked for a cushion 
to be placed under his buttocks to ease the pain. After-
glow had told him to just hold still and cooperate or 
else he would be sent back to his room and the proce -
dure would be canceled. Filter cooperated.
When the radiographic procedure was completed, 
Filter was once again pulled roughly onto the stretcher. 
Again, he experienced severe back pain. He was rolled 
into a cold, drafty hallway to await patient transport.
Time passed and Filter’s back pain became more 
severe. He was experiencing numbness and tingling in 
his right foot and leg. Other staff radiographers passed 
him in the hallway and ignored his complaint of back 
pain.
 When the patient transporter finally arrived, Filter 
was in tears due to the severe pain. When he reached 
his bed, he told the nurse, Greta Grid, R.N., that he had 
severe back pain from being pulled onto the x-ray table. 
Greta Grid was quite huffy and made it clear that the 
pain was due to lying on the hard table and not from 
being pulled or pushed onto it.
That evening Filter told his physician that he had 
received a back injury when he was pulled onto the 
86634.indb   66 8/4/08   8:42:38 AM

===== pdf p86 =====
Risk Management and Liability  n  67
x-ray table. Filter’s physician ordered a lumbar spine 
series that evening and Filter was diagnosed as having 
a subluxation of the fifth lumbar vertebrae. Who would 
be liable for Filter’s injuries? What, if any, legal implica-
tions or legal risks are involved?
Answer
Because Frank Filter did not have an existing back prob-
lem on admittance into Coulomb Memorial Medical 
Center, there is a legal risk for Amy Afterglow, Greta 
Grid, and the medical center. Everyone working in 
Coulomb Memorial Medical Center has the obligation 
to provide proper care to patients. This includes pro -
tecting the patient from any harm or injury. Meeting 
the standard of care due a patient protects Coulomb 
Memorial Medical Center. Amy Afterglow was careless 
in her rough handling of Filter. She should have asked 
other staff to assist her in moving him onto the x-ray 
table. Greta Grid was negligent in not reporting Filter’s 
back complaint to his physician and documenting the 
occurrence of his injury by the radiographer. Coulomb 
Memorial Medical Center should be held liable, under 
the doctrine of corporate negligence, for Filter’s back 
injury caused by its employees.
Vignette 12
Improper Communication Situation
Helga Bremsstrahlung, who spoke and understood 
very little English, was an outpatient at Compton Clinic. 
Bremsstrahlung was scheduled for radiographs of both 
feet. After a brief introduction, the radiographer, Paul 
Penumbra, R.T., directed the patient to the x-ray suite 
and told Bremsstrahlung to remove both shoes and get 
up on the table.
86634.indb   67 8/4/08   8:42:38 AM

===== pdf p87 =====
68  n  Medicolegal Issues for Diagnostic Imaging Professionals
Penumbra immediately left the room to get the 
proper detailed cassettes for the procedure. A few min-
utes later, he arrived in the x-ray suite to find Brems -
strahlung standing on top of the x-ray table. He began 
to laugh and told her that he did not want her to stand 
on the table, but, to lie on her back.
In a frenzy of embarrassment, Bremsstrahlung hit 
her head on the x-ray tube housing causing a laceration 
across her forehead. What, if any, legal implications or 
legal risks are involved?
Answer
Patients are very cooperative and responsive to ques -
tions and directions, given they understand what is 
being asked or stated. Therefore, reinforcing the impor-
tance of clear and accurate communication between 
patient and radiographer is necessary. Patients will do 
exactly what we ask them to do. However, by monitor -
ing a patient more closely, a radiographer will reduce 
injuries resulting from miscommunication.
Paul Penumbra should have stayed in the x-ray suite 
to assist Helga Bremsstrahlung onto the x-ray table. 
More importantly, he was careless in not making certain 
that she understood the instructions. Paul Penumbra 
and Compton Clinic should be held liable for Helga 
Bremsstrahlung’s injuries.
Review Questions
 1. Regarding the doctrine of corporate negligence, the Darling v. Charleston 
Community Hospital  … case found the hospital failed to meet the standard 
of    due to Darling.
 a. Reasonableness
 b. Injury
 c. Care
 d. Duty
86634.indb   68 8/4/08   8:42:38 AM

===== pdf p88 =====
Risk Management and Liability  n  69
 2. The medical staff physicians are subjected to the control of the    in the 
execution of their services.
 a. Hospital administrator
 b. Medical staff secretary
 c. Governing body
 d. None of the above
 3. In the Gonzales v. Nork … case, the court held that the hospital was    for 
the conduct of the medical staff.
 a. Not liable
 b. Corporately responsible
 c. Negligent
 d. Careless
 4. Any duty out of the scope and practice of licensure would be   .
 a. Lawful
 b. Careless
 c. Negligent
 d. Illegal
 5. Reporting of patient injuries is documented in the   .
 a. Patient progress notes form
 b. Physician’s notes form
 c. Nursing notes form
 d. Incident report form
86634.indb   69 8/4/08   8:42:39 AM

===== pdf p89 =====
86634.indb   70 8/4/08   8:42:39 AM

===== pdf p90 =====
71
Chapter 6
Doctrine of Informed 
Consent
Upon completion of Chapter 6, the reader will be able to:
 1. Define the doctrine of informed consent.
 2. Discuss the preparation of an informed consent.
 3. Assess the level of understanding of an informed consent.
 4. Recognize the legality of an informed consent.
 5. Discuss the concepts of: (1) who may sign a consent, (2) spouses’ consent, and 
(3) rescinding a consent.
 6. Differentiate radiologic procedures that are involved in informed consent 
lawsuits.
The Patient’s Right to Know
Doctrine of Informed Consent
The doctrine of informed consent could more appropriately be called the patient’s 
right to know and participate in his own healthcare. Informed consent is a doctrine 
that has evolved sociologically with the changing times. The courts have mandated 
that every patient is entitled to an informed consent before any procedure can be 
performed. Judge Benjamin Cordozo, while serving on the court of appeals of New 
York in a 1914 case, established that every adult has the right to determine what 
is to be done to his body (Schloendorf v. Soc. of New York Hosp., 211 N.Y. 125, 105 
N.E. 92, 1914). Judge Cordozo indicated that a surgeon who performs an operation 
86634.indb   71 8/4/08   8:42:39 AM

===== pdf p91 =====
72  n  Medicolegal Issues for Diagnostic Imaging Professionals
without the patient’s consent may be liable for assault and battery. An assault is the 
threat to do bodily harm to an individual. The act of doing the physical harm is 
the battery. It is, therefore, necessary for patients to consent to surgery or medical 
procedures in order for a charge of assault and battery to be avoided. Consent is 
the affirmation by the patient to have his/her body touched by certain designated 
individuals, such as the doctor, nurse, radiographer, and others.
In Cobb v. Grant, supra, the California Supreme Court held that a patient must 
be given the opportunity to provide an “informed consent” prior to the performance 
of certain medical procedures and treatment. The court stated that in order to give 
an “informed consent,” the patient had to be informed of:
 1. The nature of the treatment
 2. Any risk, complications, and expected benefits or effects of such treatment
 3. Any alternatives to the procedure and their risks and benefits
The patient’s informed consent as distinguished from consent is not required 
for all medical procedures and treatment. In identifying circumstances where an 
informed consent is required, the Court distinguished between those procedures, 
which it labeled “complex,” and those, which it labeled “simple” and “common.”
Radiologic Procedures Involved in Informed Consent Lawsuits
Excretory urography was the radiologic procedure most commonly involved in 
informed consent litigation. In comparison with angiographic and myelographic 
procedures, the relative risk of serious injuries from excretory urography is so low 
that even though the total number of excretory urograms is greater than that for 
the other procedures, fewer injuries might be expected. The lower frequency of risk 
disclosure to patients for urography compared with angiography and myelogra -
phy may well explain why it is involved in a greater number of informed consent 
lawsuits.
Spring et al. (1988) have reported that informed consent lawsuits involved excre-
tory urography about six times as often as contrast material-enhanced computed 
tomography (CT). The study suggests that an increase in the number of newer con-
trast studies (e.g., CT or digital subtraction angiography) may result in an increase 
in informed consent lawsuits.
Informed consent was considered by the defendant radiologist to be a significant 
factor in most of the reported lawsuits involving angiographic procedures. In 10 
(91 percent) of 11 lawsuits, the defendant radiologist made a documented effort to 
obtain an informed consent. All but one of these lawsuits resulted in favorable out-
comes for the defense. Angiography is ordinarily perceived as having a higher risk of 
injury than other radiological procedures and, therefore, more frequently involves 
a documented effort to obtain informed consent. This may explain both the lower 
86634.indb   72 8/4/08   8:42:39 AM

===== pdf p92 =====
Doctrine of Informed Consent  n  73
incidence of lawsuits instigated and of favorable outcomes for the plaintiff (Spring, 
et al, 1988, p. 248).
Preparation of an Informed Consent
A physician who instigates an informed consent form should prepare the form by 
setting forth medical information with respect to the nature of the procedure or 
treatment, its expected benefits or effects, its possible risks and complications, and 
the alternatives to the proposed treatment or procedure, and their possible risks and 
complications. The form must either be supplemented through verbal discussions 
with the patient and/or through written additions that set forth such information. 
These forms are helpful only if they can be understood by the patient. Therefore, 
it is extremely important for the medical information set forth in such forms to be 
written in clear, simple, and easily understood terms. In addition, it is absolutely 
essential for such forms to clearly state that the patient should ask any and all 
questions he/she may have about the proposed procedure. A copy of the informed 
consent should be placed in the patient’s medical records.
Verification of Informed Consent
The physician (radiologist), not the hospital, has the fiduciary duty to disclose all 
information relevant to the patient’s decision and to obtain the patient’s informed 
consent. Further, the obtaining of informed consent involves the practice of medi -
cine in which the hospital and its employees should not intervene. Hospital employ-
ees are not licensed or qualified to adequately explain the various types of medical 
procedures to the patient and to respond to the patient’s potential questions. Only 
the physician has both the technical knowledge and the background knowledge of 
the particular patient’s condition necessary to assure that an adequate disclosure of 
information, including that pertaining to the risks of treatment, has been given for 
that patient, and that proper responses have been given to the patient’s questions.
Hospital personnel (radiographers) cannot and should not be responsible for 
securing the patient’s informed consent (and concomitantly, giving the patient the 
information that is required in order to secure the patient’s informed consent). It 
can be expected that patients will ask hospital staff who are performing a proce -
dure pursuant to the doctor’s (radiologists) orders questions about what they will 
be or are doing. Radiographers generally may answer such questions; however, if it 
appears that the patient has significant questions about the nature of the procedure 
(and its benefits or risks), this may indicate that he/she may not have been given 
sufficient information about the procedure or may not understand the information 
he/she was given. The radiographer should contact the patient’s physician and/or 
radiologist in order to allow him/her to answer the questions and, thereby, help to 
assure that the patient has truly given an informed consent to the procedure.
86634.indb   73 8/4/08   8:42:39 AM

===== pdf p93 =====
74  n  Medicolegal Issues for Diagnostic Imaging Professionals
It must be understood that the radiographer is not the one performing the fluo-
roscopic procedure the patient is about to undergo. The radiographer does not have 
the necessary information, nor does he/she know what alternative radiographic pro-
cedures are available for the patient. Radiographers should not allow themselves 
to be placed in the ridiculous position of “witnessing the patient’s signature.” It is 
common practice for the radiographer to have the function of getting the patient to 
sign the radiological procedure consent form. The radiographer, generally, may not 
be present when the patient’s physician or radiologist presumably gave the neces -
sary instructions and explanations to the patient. The radiographer could be held 
personally liable if he/she knew, or should have known, the patient was uninformed 
and did not take remedial measures. The hospital could also be held liable under 
the doctrine of corporate negligence or respondeat superior if, through its person -
nel, the hospital knew, or had reason to know, that physicians (radiologists) or staff 
personnel performed procedures without a bona fide consent. The radiographer has 
a professional obligation to protect his/her employer’s interests. Because the hospi -
tal has an obligation to see that the patient is informed, the radiographer would be 
decreasing the legal risk to the hospital by informing the physician (radiologist) of 
the patient’s needs.
Legality of Informed Consents
It is basic that the intentional touching of another without his/her consent could 
be construed as a legal wrong constituting assault, battery, or both. Consent is the 
affirmation by the patient to have his/her body touched by certain designated indi-
viduals, such as a doctor, nurse, radiographer, or others. There are different classi -
fications of consents. There is the implied consent. When a patient rolls up his/her 
sleeve to receive an injection, this action can be construed as giving consent to the 
procedure. An expressed consent, as the term applies, is an affirmative action or 
statement to signify one’s intention. There are also verbal and written consents. An 
oral or verbal consent is binding. The problem arises when it comes to a question 
of evidentiary matter. It might be difficult to prove the patient gave an oral consent. 
Even where witnesses are present and hear the consent given, their testimony might 
not be consistent on details and could weaken their credibility. A written consent 
obviously offers some tangible proof that the patient voluntarily signed a form. It is 
subject to scrutiny and disbelief if other facts relevant to the situation indicate that 
the patient did not fully and intelligently understand what the affixing of his/her 
signature meant in relation to his/her medical care.
A proper consent form is an important evidentiary document in the event of 
a dispute regarding the claim that an informed consent was not given. The signed 
consent would generally be considered presumptive evidence that information to 
perform a particular act was given. The individual giving consent must be men -
tally competent and able to appreciate the material facts. The patient must have 
86634.indb   74 8/4/08   8:42:39 AM

===== pdf p94 =====
Doctrine of Informed Consent  n  75
consented voluntarily, based on sufficient knowledge and information to make an 
intelligent decision.
Rescinding Consent
The patient may rescind the consent given either verbally or in writing at any time. A 
written consent may be rescinded verbally. Any time a patient withdraws his/her con-
sent, it is as though he/she had never given a consent. This means that any procedure 
done on a patient who has rescinded his/her consent would be considered battery.
Who May Consent?
The patient on whom the procedure is to be performed is the only one who has 
authority over his/her body as long as he/she is conscious and competent. The con-
sent is invalid if the patient is intoxicated, under the influence of narcotics, delirious, 
and/or irrational. It is essential to respect the individual’s right to make his/her own 
decisions. If the patient is mentally incompetent, consent must be obtained from a 
person legally authorized to give consent for the patient. For example, an elderly or 
infirm person may have had the foresight to authorize a power of attorney designat-
ing a child or relative to act on his/her behalf.
Spouse’s Consent
Can a husband consent to his wife’s operation or radiology procedure in a nonemer-
gency situation? The answer is clearly no. And the reverse is true. The wife has no 
authority to consent for the husband.
Minor’s Consent
A minor is considered to be under the jurisdiction of his/her parents until the age of 
majority. In most states, the age of majority is 18 years. The minor may consent for 
his/her own care if (1) married, (2) emancipated, (3) pregnant, (4) suffering from 
venereal disease, or (5) in need of psychological or psychiatric care. The term eman-
cipated means the individual is no longer under the control of another. Generally, 
this occurs where a minor is working and is responsible for his/her own support 
and necessities.
The common law holds that the natural parents or legal guardians of a child 
have the authority to consent to medical care for the minor. The parent is presumed 
to act in the best interest of the child and, therefore, there is a presumption that the 
child will be protected. There are times when parents, because of religious beliefs, 
will not permit the child to receive medical care that society believes is in the best 
86634.indb   75 8/4/08   8:42:39 AM

===== pdf p95 =====
76  n  Medicolegal Issues for Diagnostic Imaging Professionals
interest of the child. In these circumstances, the state must exercise its right under 
the parens patriae doctrine and intervene to protect the health of the child. The 
law may not interfere with religious convictions, but it may interfere with religious 
practice. Religious belief is not a lawful excuse for breach of duty to provide medi -
cal care for a child. The rights of religion and parenthood are not beyond the limita-
tions of the 14th Amendment of the U.S. Constitution.
According to the Committee of Pediatric Emergency Medicine, state and fed -
eral laws and medical ethics recommendations support the emergency treatment 
of minors with an identified emergency medical condition, regardless of consent 
issues. Appropriate medical care for the minor patient, during school hours, with 
an urgent or emergent condition should never be withheld or delayed because of 
problems with obtaining a parental or guardian consent.
Patient Can Sue for Failure to Obtain Informed Consent
A North Carolina appellate court ruled that a patient’s voluntary dismissal of a 
claim of negligent treatment did not result in dismissal of her claim for failure to 
obtain informed consent. The patient brought an action against radiologists alleg -
ing that they failed to adequately inform her of the known hazards of radiation 
therapy and, therefore, did not obtain her informed consent for treatment. She also 
alleged negligence in administering the radiation. The treatment resulted in severe 
radiation damage to her intestines.
The patient voluntarily dismissed her claim based on negligence in rendering 
medical services. The radiologists alleged that her claim of lack of informed con -
sent was barred by the statute of limitations. The trial court granted their motion 
to dismiss.
On appeal, the radiologists contended that the patient took a voluntary dismissal 
on the question of their failure to obtain informed consent, arguing that “render -
ing medical services” included obtaining the informed consent to the treatment 
as well as the actual treatment. The court found that the work rendered applied to 
performance of the medical procedure, and that the informed consent claim was 
not voluntarily dismissed.
The radiologists also contended that uninformed or invalid consent was the 
same as no consent at all and, therefore, the subsequent treatment constituted 
unauthorized touching or battery. Thus, the action would be controlled by the one-
year statute of limitations for battery.
The court found that the claim was for malpractice based on failure to dis -
close the various choices with regard to the proposed treatment and the dangers 
involved, and that the three-year statute of limitations applied. Holding that the 
patient’s claim was not barred, the court reversed the trial court’s judgment (Nelson 
v. Patrick, 293 S.E. Second 829 North Carolina Court of Appeals, August 3, 1982, 
also in The Citation, 46(8): 89–90).
86634.indb   76 8/4/08   8:42:40 AM

===== pdf p96 =====
Doctrine of Informed Consent  n  77
Vignette 13
Informed Consent
Ula Umbra is a 60-year-old female admitted to Reso -
lution Hospital for a coronary angiogram. Umbra has 
signed the routine consent form as required by the hos-
pital. This was done in admitting and witnessed by the 
admission clerk.
During the course of preparing Umbra for the coro-
nary angiogram, Gerry Generator, R.T., talks to Umbra 
about her healthcare in general. Umbra states to Gener-
ator, “My doctor has not discussed this procedure with 
me, but I guess he will before it begins, won’t he?” Gen-
erator asks Umbra if she read and signed the consent 
form. She states, “I read the consent form, but I really 
don’t understand what is going to be done.”
What, if any, obligation does the radiographer have 
toward Umbra? Would he be liable if Umbra had the 
coronary angiogram under the above circumstances?
Answer
Gerry Generator, R.T., has several obligations. There 
is an obligation to the patient, the physician, and to 
Resolution Hospital. When it becomes evident that the 
patient has either not been fully informed regarding the 
coronary angiogram, or does not understand the impli-
cations of the procedure, the physician performing the 
procedure should be notified immediately.
The radiographer should document the situa -
tion and the fact that the physician was notified. The 
radiographer has an obligation to inform the patient’s 
physician of the patient’s statement so that the doctor 
may take corrective measures.
Resolution Hospital has no direct obligation to 
inform the patient regarding the coronary angiogram 
to be done. In fact, it cannot do so because only the 
physician knows what techniques and specific proce -
dures will be utilized for the specific patient. However, 
Resolution Hospital could be held as a party-defen -
dant by the patient alleging no consent was given; the 
86634.indb   77 8/4/08   8:42:40 AM

===== pdf p97 =====
78  n  Medicolegal Issues for Diagnostic Imaging Professionals
radiographer should take all reasonable measures to 
protect the hospital.
The radiographer should protect himself, also, 
because the patient could include the radiographer as 
a party-defendant. The patient has put the radiographer 
on notice that she is uninformed regarding her imminent 
coronary angiogram. The radiographer should notify the 
physician, the supervising radiographer, and any other 
appropriate parties of the situation. Otherwise, the 
radiographer could be held liable if the coronary angio-
gram were performed without the patient’s consent.
Vignette 14
Informed Consent Situation
Vicky Volt, R.T., is a staff radiographer at Incandescent 
General Hospital. Molly Milliampere, a 72-year-old 
woman, is scheduled for a lumbar myelogram. Volt is 
responsible for getting a consent signed by Milliampere 
consenting to the procedure. As Volt begins to explain 
the procedure to the patient, Milliampere asks that her 
daughter be contacted to give permission before the 
procedure begins. The radiographer has tried several 
times to contact Milliampere’s daughter, but is unable 
to reach her. The radiologist, Dr. Ohm, states that he 
has to go ahead with the procedure because the patient 
is scheduled for surgery immediately after the lumbar 
myelogram.
What, if anything, should Volt do?
Can Dr. Ohm proceed with the lumbar myelogram? 
If so, under what circumstances? What, if any, legal lia -
bilities would be involved?
Answer
There is nothing in the situation to indicate Molly Mil -
liampere is not competent and capable of consenting 
86634.indb   78 8/4/08   8:42:40 AM

===== pdf p98 =====
Doctrine of Informed Consent  n  79
to the procedure herself. The patient may consent or 
withhold consent for medical treatment or proce -
dure. The fact that she wants her daughter contacted 
should be respected. The daughter should be notified 
as requested. Milliampere may wish to consult with her 
daughter before submitting to the lumbar myelogram. 
However, the daughter’s consent cannot be substituted 
for her mother’s consent. The fact that Milliampere is 72 
years old has no bearing on her right to make decisions 
regarding her own body. Unless there is some evidence 
of incompetence or inability, only Milliampere can give 
an informed consent for the procedure.
Dr. Ohm can only proceed with the lumbar myelo -
gram if Milliampere has given an informed consent. It 
would be wise and good business for the daughter to 
be incorporated into the consent procedure because 
the patient specifically requested this, but the daugh -
ter cannot authorize the procedure where the patient 
is capable of consenting. It is not an emergency at this 
point, and Dr. Ohm could not proceed under the Emer-
gency Rule. He must have the patient’s valid consent.
If the above was not done in accordance with general 
practice in procuring consents, and the patient could 
establish she did not give a valid consent, the physician, 
radiographer, and hospital might be sued and found 
liable for assault and battery.
Postscripts to Vignette 13 and Vignette 14
The First Amendment guarantees the integrity of one’s body. Any touching of an 
individual’s body without appropriate authority or the individual’s consent could 
be construed as an assault and battery. The courts recognize assault and battery 
as giving rise to a criminal action for which the law gives a remedy in monetary 
damages.
The hospital and its employees, as well as the doctors, can be held liable for 
performing treatment or procedures without the patient’s consent. The courts apply 
the doctrine of corporate liability, respondeat superior, or other appropriate law 
and, where it can be ascertained that the hospital, as in these cases, knew or should 
have known there was no bona fide informed consent by the patient and did not 
86634.indb   79 8/4/08   8:42:40 AM

===== pdf p99 =====
80  n  Medicolegal Issues for Diagnostic Imaging Professionals
correct the situation but permitted uninformed procedures, the radiographer, phy -
sician, and hospital are at legal risk.
There must be some criteria that the radiographer follows to ensure that proper 
consent is obtained. The patient must be conscious and able to comprehend the 
document that is being signed. There should be a reasonable belief on the part of 
the radiographer that the patient has been informed regarding the nature and pur -
pose of the procedure and the possible risks related to it. The patient should be able 
to read, write, and understand the language being used for communication. The 
patient should be consenting to the procedure freely, voluntarily, and without any 
coercion “of his own will.”
Review Questions
 1. The California State Supreme Court indicated that, written into an informed 
consent, the patient must be informed of all the following except:
 a. Nature of the treatment
 b. Reasonable response to requests
 c. Risks, complications, and benefits
 d. Alternatives to the procedures
 2. The ___ has the fiduciary duty to obtain the patient’s informed consent.
 a. Radiographer
 b. Physician
 c. Hospital
 d. Nurse
 3. A written consent may be rescinded verbally or ___ at any time.
 a. In writing
 b. By statute
 c. Mandated
 d. By physician order
 4. A consent is invalid under the following patient conditions except:
 a. Intoxication
 b. Sanity
 c. Delirium
 d. Drugged
 5. Which of the following will allow a minor to consent for care?
 a. Emancipated
 b. Pregnant
 c. In need of psychological care
 d. All of the above
86634.indb   80 8/4/08   8:42:40 AM

===== pdf p100 =====
Doctrine of Informed Consent  n  81
 6. California law permits medical treatment without parental consent during 
___.
 a. A sporting event
 b. School hours
 c. Babysitting hours
 d. The morning hours
86634.indb   81 8/4/08   8:42:40 AM

===== pdf p101 =====
86634.indb   82 8/4/08   8:42:40 AM