
===== pdf p114 =====
95
 5   ␣       TRUTHFULNESS AND CONFIDENTIALITY 
  Never esteem anything as of advantage to you that will make 
you break your word or lose your self-respect.  
 MARCUS AURELIUS ANTONINUS 
Chapter Outline
     Ethical Issues
   Truthfulness and Veracity 
  Right to the Truth 
  Conﬁ dentiality 
  Obligatory Secrets 
  Exceptions to Conﬁ dentiality 
  Conﬁ dentiality and AIDS     
   Legal Issues
   HIPAA 
  Patient Authorization 
  Statutory Disclosure 
  Duty to Warn Third Parties 
  AIDS and HIV 
  Patient Access to Medical Records 
  Torts Regarding Conﬁ dentiality      
Learning Objectives
     •   Deﬁ ne truthfulness, veracity, and conﬁ dentiality. 
     •   Identify the three variables involved in expecta-
tions of truth. 
     •   Cite circumstances in which a person has a right 
to the truth. 
     •   List and deﬁ  ne three types of obligatory secrets. 
     •   Explain the importance of the professional secret. 
     •   Cite exceptions to conﬁ dentiality. 
     •   Identify and discuss the elements of defamation, 
including slander and libel per se. 
     •   Specify situations that may trigger the duty to 
warn third parties. 
     •   Identify the conﬂ ict between conﬁ dentiality and 
disclosure of HIV and AIDS. 
     •   List the statutory obligations regarding AIDS and 
HIV. 
     •   Deﬁ  ne the patient’s right of access to medical 
records. 
     •   Identify ways that the patient’s right of access 
may come into conﬂ ict with the ethical and legal 
principles by which the imaging professional must 
practice. 
 After completing the chapter, the reader will be able to perform the following:  
Key Terms
   conﬁ dentiality 
defamation
duty to warn third parties 
 HIPAA 
 lie 
place of communication 
role of communication 
 secret 
 statutory duty to report 
 truthfulness 
veracity 

===== pdf p115 =====
96 Ethical and Legal Issues for Imaging Professionals
                              ETHICAL ISSUES 
The struggle between conﬁ dentiality and truthfulness is a common one in medical imag-
ing, as in all of medicine. Imaging professionals have to consider when they must tell the 
whole truth and in what situations the whole truth may compromise the patient’s outcome. 
On the other hand, some truths must be kept conﬁ dential. The difﬁ culty for the imaging 
professional is in knowing what may be ethically concealed and what must be revealed. 
The information required during the informed consent process is discussed in Chapter 
4. This chapter discusses issues regarding truthfulness and conﬁ dentiality in imaging profes-
sionals’ dealings with patients, surrogates, and other health care professionals. For example, if 
an imaging professional overhears a physician telling a patient not to worry, the chest x-ray 
ﬁ lm looks ﬁ ne, but she should have another x-ray ﬁ lm in 6 months, should the imaging pro-
fessional indicate to the patient that she has a spot on her lung and may have a problem?    
The chapter also discusses the principles covering situations in which the truth should 
be kept conﬁ dential. For example, must an ultrasonographer conceal from a mother that 
her 13-year-old daughter is pregnant and desires an abortion? 
     TRUTHFULNESS AND VERACITY 
     D e fi nitions 
  Truthfulness is deﬁ ned as conformance with fact or reality. However, the perception 
of fact and reality may change, so truthfulness is a somewhat ﬂ uid concept.  Veracity is 
deﬁ ned as the obligation to tell the truth and not to lie or deceive others. Veracity and 
      TRUTHFULNESS 
 Truthfulness is conformity 
with fact or reality
.    
      V E R A C I T Y  
 Veracity is the obligation to 
tell the truth and not to lie 
or deceiv
e others.    
 Professional Profi  le 
       Ethical codes and the Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Act (HIPAA) are an important 
part of all health care professions. The Society of 
Diagnostic Medical Sonographers (SDMS) has 
adopted ethical codes and examination protocols 
speciﬁ c for diagnostic ultrasound. These issues de-
ﬁ ne how I as a sonographer interact with patients, 
family members, and colleagues. Consistent pro-
tocol guidelines help to maximize patient beneﬁ  ts 
while minimizing potential harm. 
My approach to each patient is similar, whether 
it is an obstetrical or an arterial duplex examination. 
Patient privacy and dignity are forefront. Interpret-
ers are requested when there is a language barrier. 
Questions regarding the patient’s medical history 
are discussed in private. Explaining the procedure, 
answering questions, and alleviating fears prior to 
and during the examination are routine. 
Diagnostic ultrasound is dependent on the edu-
cation, knowledge, and clinical skills of the operator. 
When pathology is encountered, I must broaden 
the minimum standard guidelines to achieve ad-
ditional pertinent diagnostic information. Con-
tinuing to update my knowledge and skills is an 
important part of my ethical responsibility to both 
patients and colleagues. 
The approach of health care professionals to 
medical care is deﬁ  ned by legal regulations and 
codes of conduct. These protections have been ad-
opted in the interest of the patient to ensure fair 
and consistent medical care. As sonographers, we 
are responsible for continuing to update our knowl-
edge and skills and treating every patient equally 
while respecting his or her individual rights and 
beliefs.   
   Sue     Ovel  ,   RT , RDMS, RVT   
  Staff Sonographer/Clinical Instructor  
  Radiological Associates of Sacramento 
Sacramento, California   

===== pdf p116 =====
97
truthfulness have long been regarded as fundamental to the establishment of trust among 
individuals, and they have a special signiﬁ  cance in medical imaging and other health 
care relationships. Imaging professionals and patients may have differing perceptions of 
veracity and truthfulness. Imaging professionals may believe in telling the whole truth, no 
matter how painful, but the patient’s need to know the truth may be entirely different.        
     Circumstances for Expectations of the Truth 
Truthfulness is summed up in two commands: “Do not lie, and you must communicate 
with those who have a right to the truth.” 1   The ﬁ rst command leaves the imaging pro-
fessional free to not communicate to avoid telling a  lie, and the second constrains the 
professional to share information only with those who have a right to the truth.    
A lie is a falsehood told to a person who has a reasonable expectation of the truth. 1   
The ethics of lying is judged in terms of consequences for the individual and society. 
The expectation of truth varies with the following conditions:
      •    Place of communication   
     •    Role of communication   
     •   Nature of the truth involved       
All three of these conditions are related to the obligation of conﬁ dentiality and the right 
to privacy (     Figure 5-1 ).    
If an imaging student, within earshot of a patient, asks a clinical instructor about 
pathologic changes on an image, he or she does not have a reasonable expectation of 
truth. The question asked in this place of communication may force the instructor to 
avoid telling the truth about the examination results if the patient might overhear the 
       Several accident victims arrive at the emergency department, and the trauma 
imaging specialist assigned to perform portable x-ray examinations becomes 
involved in a family’s ﬁ ght for life. The mother is critically injured, and a strong 
possibility exists that she will not survive. Her husband is making good progress. 
The physician tells him his wife is dying. The man then insists that his wife and 
children be told, but the physician decides not to tell them because it would only 
cause them more pain. The wife dies the next day. 
The trauma imaging specialist is aware of this interaction because he is busy with 
chest imaging when the husband requests that his wife be told about her condition. 
The imaging professional knows this physician has a history of determining patients’ 
needs, often contrary to their wishes. During one of the imaging procedures, the 
man asks the imaging professional what he thinks about the physician, but the 
trauma imaging specialist declines to share any information with the husband. 
    Discussion questions 
       •   Should the imaging specialist have explained the physician’s previous style of 
paternalism to the patient? 
     •   Did the physician have an obligation to tell the patient that she was dying? 
     •   Did the physician have a right to tell the husband about the wife’s condition 
even when she was competent and had no need for a surrogate? 
     •   Did the children have the right to know that their mother was dying?       
 IMAGING SCENARIO   
      L I E  
 A lie is a falsehood told 
to another who has a 
reasonable expectation of 
the 
truth.    
      PLACE OF 
COMMUNICATION 
 
The place of communication 
is the environment of the 
expec
tation of truth.    
      R O L E  O F  
COMMUNICATION 
 
The role of communication 
is the relationship between 
the communicat
ors, which 
may have an impact on the 
expectation of truth.    
CHAPTER   5     Truthfulness and Confi  dentiality

===== pdf p117 =====
98 Ethical and Legal Issues for Imaging Professionals
conversation and become distressed. Students do have an expectation of truth, however, 
if they ask the same question in the classroom during a ﬁ  lm analysis class. This is an 
example of expectations varying with the place of  communication. 
If an imaging student asks the clinical coordinator for information about another 
student’s performance on a clinical competency examination, the inquiring student has 
no reasonable expectation of truth because of the roles of the two communicators. The 
score of another student is not the student’s concern, and the clinical coordinator has an 
obligation of conﬁ dentiality to all the students. 
The nature of the truth involved alters the expectation of truth in questions concern-
ing private matters. If an imaging professional asks a student or any other person about 
ﬁ nances, sex life, or anything of a personal or private nature, the imaging professional 
should not expect a truthful answer. 
Overly curious imaging professionals may be found in many imaging departments, 
just as overly curious people are found in every profession. Such people have unreason-
able expectations of the truth. The temptation is to tell these people to mind their own 
business, but this is not always the wisest course in the hospital setting, where teamwork 
is imperative. “Snoopy” imaging professionals have no reasonable expectation of the 
truth and should be counseled about their unprofessional behavior. 
Concealment of the truth is not necessarily a lie, and in certain situations the imaging 
professional does not have to tell the whole truth. Thus the question arises concerning 
the circumstances in which people have a right to the truth.   
     RIGHT TO THE TRUTH 
A person has the right to truthful communication during the informed consent process, 
when making decisions about treatment, and when making important nonmedical deci-
sions. If a patient’s computed tomography (CT) scan reveals that lung cancer has spread 
to the liver and other vital organs, the patient needs to be informed of this terminal 
Place
of communication
Role
of communicators
Nature
of the truth
Reasonable expectations
of the truth
FIGURE 5-1       Components of a reasonable expectation of truth.     

===== pdf p118 =====
99
condition to make necessary plans. If the information is not provided, the patient may 
not make necessary arrangements or deal with family, psychological, and spiritual issues. 
In cases of terminal illness, such practical needs are often more important than medical 
needs to the patient. 
In the previous section the patient’s expectation of the truth was mentioned. This is an 
important consideration for the imaging professional because the patient may ask about 
the outcome of an imaging examination, fully expecting the truth. The truth about the 
examination, however, may entail information only a radiologist or the patient’s physi-
cian can provide. Therefore the imaging professional in this situation cannot provide 
the whole truth to the patient. For example, if the patient expects a truthful answer to 
the question, “Has my cancer spread?”, the imaging professional must deal with the 
patient’s expectation of truth by being considerate and understanding but must explain 
to the patient that the radiologist or the patient’s physician will provide this informa-
tion. Imaging professionals do not have the authority to discuss pathologic ﬁ ndings with 
patients. In this type of dilemma they have to avoid the whole truth even if they are 
certain that the cancer has spread. Image interpretation for the patient is the purview of 
the physician, who is also qualiﬁ ed to answer follow-up questions. 
     CONFIDENTIALITY 
Considerations of conﬁ dentiality are as important as truthfulness in the discussion of 
patients’ rights and the imaging professional’s obligations. Conﬁ dentiality concerns the 
keeping of secrets: “A secret is knowledge a person has a right or obligation to conceal. 
Obligatory secrets are secrets that arise from the fact that harm will follow if a particular 
knowledge is revealed. …These are the natural secret, the promised secret, and the pro-
fessional secret” 1   (     Box 5-1 ).        
     OBLIGATORY SECRETS 
     Natural Secrets 
Information shared in a natural secret is by its nature harmful if revealed. An imag-
ing professional may know that a patient has acquired immunodeﬁ  ciency syndrome 
(AIDS) but has the obligation to keep the knowledge conﬁ dential. If the information is 
made public, the person positive for human immunodeﬁ ciency virus (HIV) could have 
difﬁ culty gaining employment and might be persecuted socially. Some situations are 
more complex. For example, a cardiovascular technologist is involved in a procedure that 
indicates a patient needs immediate cardiac surgery, but the patient decides not to have 
the surgery. Within a few days the technologist boards an airplane and realizes the pilot 
is the patient who chose not to have cardiac surgery. Should the technologist tell the 
        An obligatory secret is a conﬁ dence that will result in harm if it is revealed. Oblig-
atory secrets are of three types:
       1.   Natural —a secret that by its nature would be harmful if revealed 
   2.   Promised — a secret the receiver has promised to conceal 
   3.   Professional — a secret maintained to protect the patient, society, and 
 profession         
BOX 5-1  OBLIGATORY SECRETS 
      CONFIDENTIALITY 
 Confi  dentiality is the 
duty owed by health 
care pr
oviders to protect 
the privacy of patient 
information.    
      SECRET 
 A secret is knowledge 
a person has a right or 
obligation to 
conceal.    
CHAPTER   5     Truthfulness and Confi  dentiality

===== pdf p119 =====
100 Ethical and Legal Issues for Imaging Professionals
airline or some other authority of the pilot’s medical condition? Does the harm that may 
come from concealing the natural secret outweigh the harm to the former patient? 
     Promised Secrets 
Knowledge a person has promised to conceal is a promised secret. The harmful effects of 
breaking a promise complicate professional relationships and discourage the sharing of privi-
leged information that may be vital to patient care. Imaging professionals who cannot be 
trusted to keep secrets about patients or co-workers not only breach conﬁ  dentiality, but also 
lose trust as employees or friends. Proportionality must govern the imaging professional’s 
decisions about divulging promised secrets. If the risk of keeping the secret outweighs the 
harm to the patient or friend, the imaging professional must make a decision. For example, if 
a student technologist knows another student has hepatitis (and has sworn not to tell because 
graduation is in a month and the student with hepatitis has already used the maximum sick 
time) and they are both scheduled to scrub for an invasive vascular procedure, the student may 
choose to conﬁ de in an instructor if concerned about the spread of infection, regardless of the 
degree of risk to the patient. The student’s peace of mind is important when it may inﬂ uence 
the successful completion of the procedure. The student who promises a classmate to keep 
such a secret may need to reevaluate the ethical implications of this kind of promise. 
     Professional Secrets 
The most binding of the obligatory secrets is the professional secret. When professional 
secrets are revealed, both the patient and the imaging profession are harmed. This dam-
age to the reputation of the imaging profession harms the community, which depends 
on a limited number of professionals for imaging services. If people lack faith in imaging 
professionals, they may choose not to have necessary imaging procedures performed. 
This in turn complicates the diagnostic process and endangers the health of patients. 
The importance of professional secrecy has been recognized by society. A body of 
laws encourages privileged communication and the maintenance of conﬁ  dentiality 
between health care providers and patients. The Patient’s Bill of Rights of the American 
Hospital Association (AHA) describes the importance of professional secrecy in the 
hospital setting based on the nature of the knowledge, the implied promise of secrecy, 
and the good of society and the profession (see p. 255).   
     EXCEPTIONS TO CONFIDENTIALITY 
Some exceptions to conﬁ dentiality are mandated by state law. They include mechanisms 
for the reporting of certain types of wounds, communicable diseases, automobile acci-
dents, abuse, birth defects, drug addiction, and industrial accidents. State requirements 
may vary. 
The AHA’s Committee on Biomedical Ethics notes the following conditions in 
which conﬁ  dentiality may be breached 2  :
Also subject to state law, conﬁ  dentiality may be overridden when the life or safety of the 
patient is endangered such as when knowledgeable intervention can prevent threatened suicide 
or self-injury. In addition, the moral obligation to prevent substantial and foreseeable harm to 
an innocent third party usually is greater than the moral obligation to protect conﬁ dentiality. 
In many jurisdictions, imaging professionals are required to report suspected cases of 
child and adult abuse. Such situations may involve families with whom they are familiar. 

===== pdf p120 =====
101CHAPTER   5     Truthfulness and Confi  dentiality
The family may urge them not to intercede because the abuser is in treatment and the 
reporting mechanism might deter continued treatment. Although this may be a difﬁ cult 
situation for the technologist, employers expect loyalty to the institution, which includes 
the reporting of abuse. 
Exceptions to conﬁ dentiality may be debated in discussions of the family’s need to 
know (as in the case at the beginning of this chapter), exceptions concerning children 
and adolescents (e.g., abortive processes, treatment for sexually transmitted diseases), 
medical condition of public ﬁ  gures (e.g., whether Americans have the right to know 
if the President is in critical condition), use of hospital records for research and billing 
purposes, and third-party payers (e.g., need for payment balanced against patient conﬁ -
dentiality). Exceptions to conﬁ dentiality are discussed further in the legal section of this 
chapter and are listed in      Box 5-2 .
     CONFIDENTIALITY AND AIDS 
Imaging professionals are not usually placed in situations in which they must inform a 
patient that they have HIV. Occasionally, however, patients ask imaging professionals 
if they are HIV positive. Imaging professionals must decide based on institutional rules 
and professional experience whether this information is necessary for the patient to give 
informed consent. Other situations may be just as difﬁ  cult. An imaging professional 
may need to report a fellow technologist who has AIDS and does not take necessary 
protective measures with patients. Although the revelation may cause grief and loss of 
social contacts or even employment, the technologist must consider the good of patients 
and the profession. 
Some professionals are deontologists and believe that stricter rules of right and wrong 
should be used in keeping information conﬁ dential. They believe that the act of keeping 
information conﬁ dential is more morally important than the consequences this act may 
cause. 
Because of these differing and often conﬂ  icting viewpoints, questions concerning 
AIDS will continue to fuel public debate. The hope, however, is that a cure or vaccine 
will be discovered and the problem will no longer haunt the public and health care 
professionals.   
     LEGAL ISSUES 
Ethical dilemmas often arise regarding conﬂ  ict between truth, conﬁ  dentiality, and 
secrecy. The law provides some deﬁ  nite parameters regarding patient conﬁ  dentiality. 
One of the most important obligations a health care provider owes a patient is the 
           Wounds 
  Abuse 
  Communicable diseases 
  Accidents 
  Birth defects 
  Addictions 
  Family’s need to know 
  Public’s need to know 
  Third-party payers      
BOX 5-2  EXCEPTIONS TO CONFIDENTIALITY 

===== pdf p121 =====
102 Ethical and Legal Issues for Imaging Professionals
protection of conﬁ dences revealed by the patient. Situations do exist in which this duty 
is not absolute, and at times the law actually imposes a duty to disclose conﬁ  dential 
information. The law regarding the duty of conﬁ dentiality and the exceptions to these 
rules are discussed here. 
     H I P A A  
Concerns about the privacy of patient medical information have intensiﬁ  ed with the 
growth of electronic recordkeeping and the Internet. In response to these concerns 
Congress enacted the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 
(HIPAA). The major purposes of this regulation are (1) to protect and enhance the 
rights of consumers by providing them access to their health information and control-
ling the inappropriate use of that information; (2) to improve the quality of health care 
in the United States by restoring trust in the health care system among consumers, 
health care professionals, and the multiple organizations and individuals committed to 
the delivery of care; and (3) to improve the efﬁ  ciency and effectiveness of health care 
delivery by creating a national framework for health privacy protection that builds on 
efforts by states, health systems, and individual organizations and individuals (     Box 5- 3 ).3   
A sample privacy notice appears in Appendix C. 
HIPAA regulations have added some clarity and conformity to issues regarding elec-
tronic personal health care information and have mandated that patients receive a notice 
of the facility’s privacy practices. HIPAA has also created a requirement that only the 
minimum necessary information for the purpose of disclosure be released, rather than 
the entire record as was assumed in the past. Disclosures allowed without permission 
from the patient include disclosures to the patient; to other health care providers for 
            1.   Patients gain more control over their own health information. Providers 
must inform patients how their information will be used and to whom it can 
be disclosed. The release of information is limited by patient authorization 
under many circumstances. Patients may access their own information and 
request correction of potentially harmful errors. 
   2.   Boundaries are set on medical record use and release. The amount of infor-
mation to be released is the “minimum necessary” for the purpose as opposed 
to release of the entire medical record, which was the standard in the past. 
   3.   The security of personal health information is ensured by speciﬁ c mandates 
on providers and others who may access health care information. Privacy-
conscious business practices, with internal procedures including a compliance 
ofﬁ cer, must be in place to protect the privacy of medical records. 
   4.   The rules create accountability for medical record use and release, with new 
criminal and civil penalties for improper use or disclosure. 
   5.   The rules attempt to balance public responsibility with privacy protections, 
requiring the disclosure of information for only limited public purposes such 
as public health and research.        
BOX 5-3  HOW HIPAA WORKS 
   a      From Furrow BR, Greaney TL, Johnson SH, et al:  Health law: cases, materials and problems,  ed 5, St Paul, Minn, 
2004, West. 
      H I P A A  
 Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Ac
t, 
enacted by the federal 
government to enhance 
the rights of consumers 
regarding access to their 
records, limit access of 
others to those records, and 
improve quality, effi  ciency, 
and eff  ectiveness of health 
care delivery through a 
national framework.    

===== pdf p122 =====
103CHAPTER   5     Truthfulness and Confi  dentiality
treatment purposes; for payment of services; for health care operations, including quality 
assurance information; for appointment reminders, treatment alternatives, and health-
related beneﬁ ts; in the facility directory; for clergy; for individuals involved in payment 
of care; and for approved research projects. Under HIPAA, special circumstances also 
allow the disclosure of health information without patient permission. The most com-
mon of these are when required by law, including subpoenas or other court-ordered 
disclosures and law enforcement requests under certain conditions; to other entities for 
billing purposes; organ and tissue donors; and public health risks. See the sample privacy 
notice in Appendix C for more detailed information. 
HIPAA also creates patient rights or in many jurisdictions reinforces existing patient 
rights. These rights include the right to inspect and copy their records; the right to ask 
for the information to be amended if the patient believes it to be inaccurate; the right 
to ask what disclosures have been made; the right to request restriction of information 
disclosure; the right to request the method of communication; and the right to a paper 
copy of the privacy notice of the institution. 
HIPAA clariﬁ es to some extent what may or may not be disclosed. Some of the 
exceptions are discussed further in the following sections. These include situations when 
patient authorization is required; statutory duties to disclose information; the duty to 
warn third parties of danger; and AIDS and HIV conﬁ dentiality and reporting. 
HIPAA codiﬁ es and gives conformity to privacy regulations throughout the coun-
try. HIPAA does not provide a right to sue but instead provides a requirement to ﬁ  le a 
written complaint with the Secretary of Health and Human Services (HHS) through 
the Ofﬁ ce of Civil Rights. The Secretary has discretion of investigation, and civil and 
criminal penalties may be imposed. However, according to the interim ﬁ  nal rule by 
which HHS established procedures for imposing monetary penalties, the department 
“intends to seek and promote voluntary compliance.” 3   This will probably mean that the 
HIPAA privacy rules will become a new standard of care for handling conﬁ  dential 
patient information in negligence suits. 
     PATIENT AUTHORIZATION 
Patients may explicitly consent to the release of medical information in their records. 
Presumed consent has always existed for access to treating providers, when a patient is 
transferred from one provider to another, and when emergency treatment requires access 
to records. 3   This has now been codiﬁ  ed in HIPAA for electronic record disclosure. 
Under HIPAA, reasons for disclosure without consent include treatment, payment, 
health care operations, appointment reminders, treatment alternatives, and health-related 
beneﬁ ts; fundraising activities; facility directory; clergy; disclosure to those involved in 
payment of care; and research. If permission is given for reasons other than these listed, 
that permission may be revoked in writing at any time. Special circumstances exist that 
do not require authorization for release of information, as discussed previously. 
Much of the law regarding disclosure of health care information has not changed but 
has been codiﬁ ed by a federal statute. For example, patients have been found to have 
waived their rights to conﬁ  dentiality when they put their mental or physical state at 
issue in a lawsuit. In the case of a lawsuit, a subpoena (a request signed by a judicial ofﬁ -
cer requesting records when a lawsuit is in progress) may be issued. The subpoena must 
specify the records to be disclosed. In addition, while most of this is now codiﬁ  ed by 
HIPAA for electronic information, case law has found that patient consent for in-house 

===== pdf p123 =====
104 Ethical and Legal Issues for Imaging Professionals
use of medical information (e.g., in-house quality assurance committees, Joint Commis-
sion on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations [ JCAHO] inspections, state institu-
tional licensure reviewers) is implied by the patient’s agreement to treatment, although 
some states have statutes expressly authorizing access. 3   
Release of patient information to outside reviewers is governed by state law as well 
as HIPAA, which supersedes state law in most respects and covers Veterans Adminis-
tration (VA) hospitals and other federal facilities. Some statutes allow state boards to 
review patient records for evaluation of provider misconduct, and the Medicare pro-
gram requires providers to allow peer review organizations access to records of Medicare 
patients. HIPAA regulations generally govern the release of electronic records for these 
purposes. Imaging professionals should consult the risk management department in 
their facility, however, since in the absence of statutory or judicial support for release 
of information to outside reviewers, the sharing of information from patient medical 
records poses liability risks. 
Third-party payers are the most common outside requesters of medical information. 
Although patient consent has previously been necessary for this release, the HIPAA regu-
lations now encompass this aspect for electronic information and do not require patient 
authorization. Regardless, most insurers require patients to authorize release of informa-
tion when they ﬁ le claims for payment. 3   Some states have also enacted statutes for dis-
closure to insurers without authorization to determine responsibility for payment. These 
regulations may seem confusing. The facility’s risk management and privacy personnel 
should always be the imaging professional’s guide for the procedures in the facility. 
     STATUTORY DISCLOSURE 
HIPAA reinforces the obligation to follow state public health laws that require medical 
professionals and institutions to report a variety of medical conditions and incidents, 
including venereal disease; contagious diseases such as tuberculosis; wounds inﬂ icted by 
violence; poisonings; industrial accidents; abortions; drug abuse; and abuse of children, 
elderly people, and people with disabilities. The justiﬁ cation for overriding patient con-
ﬁ  dentiality is the state’s interest in protecting public health. 3   
The statutory duty to report certain medical conditions or incidents may extend to 
the imaging professional. Because laws vary from state to state, imaging professionals 
should seek advice from legal counsel at their institution regarding conditions or inci-
dents that must be statutorily reported.     
     DUTY TO WARN THIRD PARTIES 
The duty to maintain conﬁ dentiality may come into conﬂ ict with the duty to disclose 
information to third parties in order to warn them of a risk such as violence or conta-
gious disease. Generally, the  duty to warn third parties  is based on statute (such as the 
venereal disease or child abuse reporting statute) and the duty established through case 
law to warn identiﬁ able third parties threatened by patients. HIPAA also reinforces 
this duty. In recent years the most difﬁ cult conﬂ ict between conﬁ dentiality and duty to 
warn has arisen in cases in which AIDS or HIV information is involved; this dilemma 
is discussed in a separate section.    
Case law imposes a duty to warn third parties regarding psychiatric dangerous-
ness. The precedent-setting case was  Tarasoff v Regents of the University of California    4   
(    Box 5-4 ). The duty to warn in  Tarasoff involved a speciﬁ  c, identiﬁ able third party. 
      STATUTORY DUTY 
TO REPORT 
 The statutory duty to report 
is the legal obligation to 
report a var
iety of medical 
conditions and incidents, 
including venereal disease; 
contagious diseases such 
as tuberculosis; wounds 
infl  icted by violence; 
poisonings; industrial 
accidents; abortions; 
drug abuse; and abuse of 
children, elderly people, 
and people with disabilities.    
      DUTY TO WARN THIRD 
PARTIES 
 
The duty to warn third 
parties is the obligation 
to disclose infor
mation to 
warn third parties of a risk 
of violence or contagious 
disease or some other risk.    

===== pdf p124 =====
105CHAPTER   5     Truthfulness and Confi  dentiality
         Tarasoff v Regents of the University of California involved an outpatient (Prosenjit 
Poddar) who was under the care of a psychologist (Dr. Moore) at the Cowell 
Memorial Hospital of the University of California. During the course of treat-
ment, Dr. Moore learned from Poddar that he intended to kill Tatiana Tarasoff 
because she had spurned Poddar’s romantic advances. 
On the basis of this information, Dr. Moore had the campus police detain 
Poddar, apparently at the hospital. Poddar was released shortly afterward. Despite 
disagreement among the psychiatrists, the ﬁ  nal decision was that no further 
action should be taken to conﬁ ne Poddar. This judgment proved to be a mistake; 
2 months later Poddar shot and then repeatedly stabbed Tarasoff. 
The plaintiffs, Tarasoff ’s parents, brought a wrongful death claim against the 
four psychiatrists. The plaintiffs claimed that the defendants should be liable 
because they failed to conﬁ ne Poddar and because they failed to warn Tarasoff 
or her parents about Poddar’s threat. Liability was not found for failure to con-
ﬁ ne Poddar, but it was found for failure to warn the identiﬁ  able third person in 
danger.   
BOX 5-4  CASE STUDY IN THE DUTY TO WARN THIRD PARTIES 
       A nuclear medicine technologist is performing a bone scan on a patient from the 
inpatient mental health center. Extra images are needed, and consequently the 
patient is in the imaging room for almost an hour, alone with the technologist 
for most of that time. The patient obviously wants to talk and starts telling the 
technologist about his brother-in-law, who the patient feels is responsible for his 
involuntary committal into the facility. The patient becomes increasingly upset 
and eventually tells the technologist about a plan to get even with the brother-
in-law when he is released. The plan involves tampering with the brakes on the 
brother-in-law’s car, which the patient assures the technologist he can do because 
he was formerly a mechanic. 
    Discussion questions 
       •   Does the technologist have a duty to ensure that the brother-in-law is warned? 
     •   Is the fact that disclosing this information will probably have an effect on 
the patient’s continued hospitalization and treatment a consideration in this 
situation?
     •   Does a duty to disclose outweigh the basic duty to keep patient conﬁ dences? 
     •   What should the technologist do if a statute mandates strict conﬁ dentiality 
regarding mental health treatment?       
 IMAGING SCENARIO   

===== pdf p125 =====
106 Ethical and Legal Issues for Imaging Professionals
This duty imposed by  Tarasoff,  to warn when an endangered third party is readily 
identiﬁ able, has been accepted by most states. Only Texas and Virginia reject the 
Tarasoff duty. 5,6   Some jurisdictions have expanded the duty to include readily identi-
ﬁ able individuals who would be at risk of the patient’s violence or even whole classes 
foreseeably at risk. Some cases attempt to identify third parties who must be warned, 
typically in situations of psychiatric dangerousness. 3
Situations involving the duty to warn of psychiatric dangerousness are not routine to 
the imaging profession. Because this duty extends to all medical professions, however, 
imaging professionals may want to seek clariﬁ cation on the extent of the duty imposed 
in their jurisdiction, particularly if their facility has a psychiatric or mental health com-
ponent. Patients sometimes feel very comfortable with imaging professionals and vol-
unteer information they have not shared with their physician, psychiatrist, or therapist. 
This situation is more likely to arise when the imaging procedure is lengthy and the 
imaging professional and patient are alone in the room throughout the procedure, as 
could occur during a nuclear medicine study. 
Duties to disclose conﬁ dential information regarding contagious diseases have been 
imposed on physicians. Foreseeable third parties and parties at risk who must be warned 
in these situations have been held to include family members, neighbors, and anyone 
who is physically intimate with the patient. Generally, the standard for the imposition 
of liability is whether reasonable care was used. 3   This means that if a court was to ﬁ nd 
that a reasonable person would have found a duty to warn a particular third person, 
but the physician failed to warn, liability could be found. This duty extends to other 
health care professionals. However, situations in which an imaging professional would 
be required to disclose such information are rare. In reality, this issue would probably 
arise only if an imaging professional was also working in a clinic or physician’s ofﬁ ce as 
a medical assistant. In such a situation the imaging professional should become aware of 
the policies and procedures of the ofﬁ ce or clinic regarding disclosure, ensuring that the 
duty to warn third parties is addressed. Generally, if accurate disclosure of information 
is made in good faith for a legitimate purpose, courts are reluctant to impose liability 
for that disclosure. 7    
     AIDS AND HIV 
Because of the special characteristics of AIDS and the AIDS epidemic, AIDS conﬁ  -
dentiality and reporting present unique challenges to health care workers. A conﬂ  ict 
often arises between the general duty to keep conﬁ  dences and the speciﬁ c obligation 
to disclose medical information as part of the duty to warn others. This is complicated 
by the fear of AIDS, the ignorance about the ways in which it is spread, and the his-
tory of prejudice and discrimination against gay men (among whom AIDS is most 
common). 
Unlike many contagious diseases, the HIV virus cannot be spread by casual con-
tact, which may limit the need for disclosure of information. 3   In addition, the rate of 
infection through heterosexual genital contact is very low (about 0.001 per exposure). 
The argument in favor of warning is that longer-term partners may not yet have been 
infected and so should be warned. Another argument for disclosure of HIV status is 
the transmission of the disease to unborn children. While mandatory testing of preg-
nant women is not required, the possibility of transmission to unborn children has 
justiﬁ ed implementation of U.S. Public Health Guidelines for universal counseling and 

===== pdf p126 =====
107CHAPTER   5     Truthfulness and Confi  dentiality
voluntary HIV testing for pregnant women. As a result of testing and the use of medi-
cation to prevent perinatal transmission of HIV, the number of pediatric HIV cases 
diagnosed each year has signiﬁ cantly decreased since 1993. 8   Despite recent strides in 
treatment techniques, the strongest argument for warning is that at present AIDS is 
incurable and therefore prevention is essential. 3   
The conﬂ ict is evident. Strict conﬁ dentiality may encourage persons who could be 
infected to come forward to be tested and voluntarily modify their behavior to avoid 
infecting others, but limited disclosure may better protect persons who could be exposed 
to possible infection (     Box 5-5 ). 
The states have adopted a variety of legislative and administrative approaches to conﬁ -
dentiality and disclosure of information regarding HIV positivity, AIDS-related  complex 
(ARC), and AIDS status. 3   All states now require physicians to report both HIV and 
AIDS to the state health department. Several states have mandated strict conﬁ dentiality 
by statute, and others have adopted statutes to permit disclosure, including some states that 
allow disclosure only after counseling and physician’s warning of intent to disclose. In these 
states physicians are protected from liability whether they choose to disclose or not. 3  
Consider the AMA position on the subject: 
Where there is no statute that mandates or prohibits reporting of seropositive (AIDS or ARC 
infected) to public health authorities and it is clear that the seropositive individual is endan-
gering an identiﬁ ed third party, the physician should (1) attempt to persuade the infected 
individual to cease endangering the third party; (2) if persuasion fails, notify authorities; and 
(3) if authorities take no action, notify and counsel the endangered third party. 9   
Because of the differences in statutes among jurisdictions, imaging professionals may 
want to consult the risk management department or legal counsel at their facility to 
determine the law in their jurisdiction. 
       Mary Smith, a local dentist, is having a radionuclide ventriculogram this morn-
ing. The nuclear medicine technologist performing the examination has access 
to her chart and notices that she is HIV positive. The technologist uses universal 
precautions, and the examination is performed without event. At lunch in the 
cafeteria, the technologist tells a nurse friend who works in the emergency depart-
ment that Mary Smith is HIV positive. This is not only overheard in the cafeteria 
but also spread in the emergency department as the friend tells several of her co-
workers. When Mary Smith returns to her practice, she ﬁ  nds that many of her 
scheduled patients have canceled their appointments. She tracks down the cause 
of some of the cancellations to information regarding her HIV status, which her 
patients learned from various hospital employees. 
    Discussion questions 
       •   Did the technologist breach patient conﬁ  dentiality by telling a friend about 
Mary Smith’s HIV status? 
     •   Did the technologist also expose the facility to liability? 
     •   What are possible origins of the duty to maintain this conﬁ dence?       
 IMAGING SCENARIO   

===== pdf p127 =====
108 Ethical and Legal Issues for Imaging Professionals
     PATIENT ACCESS TO MEDICAL RECORDS 
An area of concern in patient conﬁ dentiality is patients’ access to medical records. Over the 
past decade, many jurisdictions have enacted statutes allowing patients access to their medical 
records. Now HIPAA also mandates a speciﬁ c patients’ right of access to their own records. 
Some exceptions to this right exist, including psychotherapy notes, information compiled in 
anticipation of lawsuits, and other speciﬁ  c statutory exceptions. Patients also have the right to 
request a review of refusal to provide access with some exceptions including those mentioned 
above, records created in connection with correctional facilities, criminal proceedings, and 
research projects. Generally, parents have the right of access to their children’s records. Facili-
ties are required to have policies in place outlining the speciﬁ c regulations, and imaging pro-
fessionals should become familiar with the policies in their facility. In addition, the imaging 
department should have a policy in place that implements HIPAA with regard to patients’ 
requests to view their radiographs. Imaging professionals should be familiar with that policy. 
     TORTS REGARDING CONFIDENTIALITY 
     Breach of Confi dentiality 
Conﬁ dentiality is the duty owed by health care providers to protect the privacy of 
patient information. This duty stems largely from the right to privacy, but courts have 
imposed liability based on statutes deﬁ  ning expected conduct, ethical duties owed to the 
        These recent news reports may support the argument for disclosure. Most states now 
have statutes criminalizing the intentional exposure of others to the HIV virus.
      •   Angela Harris, St. Charles, Missouri, facing three counts of recklessly risk-
ing another person with HIV infection. Four additional people have come 
forward, including the mother of a 17-year-old boy with whom Harris had 
unprotected sex. Harris, 26, has known her status since she was 14 years old.   
Susan Weich, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, April 13, 2006   
     •   Unidentiﬁ  ed mother, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada, charged with criminal 
negligence causing bodily harm after refusing prenatal and postnatal care and 
ignoring advice that would have prevented her baby from acquiring HIV. 
At the time of the article, this was the only known case of someone being 
prosecuted for vertical transmission of the HIV virus.   
The Toronto Sun, May 28, 2005   
     •   Anthony Whitﬁ eld, Olympia, Washington, convicted on 17 counts of crimi-
nal assault for having unprotected sex with 17 different women while know-
ing that he was HIV positive. Whitﬁ  eld has been HIV positive since 1992.   
Mark Fefer, The Seattle Weekly, December 1, 2004   
     •   Amazingly, although a majority of states now have laws criminalizing HIV 
exposure,  The Seattle Weekly found only a dozen prosecutions throughout the 
United States through 2004.   
Mark Fefer, The Seattle Weekly, December 1, 2004     
Do these current events change your attitude toward disclosure of medical 
information? Why or why not? In what way do they affect your attitudes about 
truthfulness and conﬁ dentiality?   
BOX 5-5  CURRENT EVENTS IN AIDS CONFIDENTIALITY AND REPORTING 

===== pdf p128 =====
109CHAPTER   5     Truthfulness and Confi  dentiality
patient,10   breach of the ﬁ duciary duty to maintain conﬁ dentiality, and breach of contract 
or implied contract between patient and physician or health care facility. 11   
Regardless of the origin of the duty of conﬁ  dentiality, imaging professionals 
clearly have an obligation to keep medical and personal information about patients in 
conﬁ dence. As health care providers, imaging professionals have access to a vast amount 
of information on patients. This duty of conﬁ  dentiality extends to oral, written, and 
computer communication, as well as reproduction of records and employee conduct 
(    Box 5-6 ). Breach of the duty to hold information in conﬁ dence may cause liability for 
the individual and the facility. 
In certain circumstances, remedies are available through state and federal statutes to 
compensate patients for breach of conﬁ dentiality. Case law has conﬁ rmed that courts do 
award compensation for these breaches of conﬁ dence. 12   
The Code of Federal Regulation and many state laws provide a high level of conﬁ den-
tiality for patients receiving treatment for drug or alcohol abuse. 13   These requirements 
have generally caused providers to refuse to disclose even whether a certain individual 
is a patient. Many states have enacted legislation protecting conﬁ  dential information 
regarding HIV or AIDS status, and courts have been willing to allow claims based on 
these statutes. Unless disclosure is mandated by patient consent, statute, a duty to warn 
third parties, or the special circumstances surrounding HIV and AIDS, imaging profes-
sionals have a clear duty to maintain conﬁ dentiality of medical and related information 
regarding patients.     
     Defamation 
The tort of  defamation is based on the right to maintain a good reputation. 13   As stated 
earlier, the opportunity for defamation may arise in the delivery of patient care and is 
therefore worthy of discussion.    
Defamation is the utterance or publication of an unprivileged false statement that 
hurts another’s reputation. If the publication is oral, the defamation is slander; if written, 
       An imaging professional has a family member in the hospital and is staying on a cot 
in the patient’s room. Early one morning she hears the nurses in the hallway giving 
report, which includes patients’ conditions and treatment. She mentions this to the 
next nurse who comes into her family member’s room. The nurse makes excuses 
about why the reports were given in a hallway rather than a private room. These 
include issues of safety for the patients and stafﬁ ng shortages. In fact the nurse is 
quite put out that the imaging professional would bring this up, let alone question 
issues of stafﬁ ng shortages. After this encounter the level of care for the imaging 
professional’s family member seems to decline. The situation is exacerbated by the 
administration of the wrong IV medicine to the patient. At this point the imaging 
professional becomes very concerned about the care of all the patients on the ﬂ oor. 
    Discussion questions 
       •   What ethical and legal dilemmas has the imaging professional encountered? 
     •  In what manner most meaningful to patient care should she handle this situation?       
 IMAGING SCENARIO   
      DEFAMATION 
 Defamation is the making 
of a false statement to a 
third par
ty that is harmful to 
another’s reputation. In the 
medical imaging setting, 
defamation may occur 
if something false that is 
harmful to the reputation 
is said to another person 
about a patient, a patient’s 
family member, a visitor, 
another employee, or a 
physician.    

===== pdf p129 =====
110 Ethical and Legal Issues for Imaging Professionals
           Verbal communication 
    Patient information should not be discussed where others can overhear the 
conversation, such as in hallways, elevators, the cafeteria, the shuttle bus, or 
restaurants. Discussion of clinical information in public areas is unacceptable 
even if the patient’s name is not used. Doing so can raise doubts with patients 
and visitors about our respect for their privacy.     
    Written information 
    Conﬁ dential papers, reports, and computer printouts should be kept in a secure place. 
  Conﬁ dential papers should be picked up as soon as possible from copiers, mail 
boxes, conference room tables, and other publicly accessible locations. 
  Conﬁ dential papers should be appropriately disposed of, for example, torn or 
shredded.     
    Computer information 
    Passwords should not be shared with anyone else. 
  Passwords should not be written down and left where others can ﬁ nd and use them. 
  Once a user is logged on, no one else should be allowed to use the computer under 
that user’s password. 
  Users should log off when leaving a workstation.     
    Reproduction and faxing of patient information 
    Before faxing a document, employees should make sure of the following:
   Sender information is correct. 
  The receiving fax is in a secure location. 
  A patient release of information form allows faxing of the information. 
  The fax cover sheet contains a conﬁ dentiality disclosure, including notice that 
the information is not to be disclosed to another party and, if received in 
error, should be destroyed and the sender notiﬁ ed.        
    Receipt of faxed information 
    Fax transmissions should be removed immediately and delivered to the correct 
recipient. 
  Faxed information should be treated as conﬁ dential. 
  Information received in error should be destroyed and the sender notiﬁ ed.     
    Sensitive information 
    The following information should be released only through the health informa-
tion department of the facility:
   Communication between patient and psychotherapist or social worker 
  Sexually transmitted disease test results or visit notes 
  HIV test results and related information 
  Substance abuse rehabilitation treatment records 
  Sexual assault treatment records        
    Employee conduct 
    Only the information needed for job performance should be accessed. 
  Data must not be accessed simply to satisfy a curiosity. Looking up a friend’s 
birthday, address, or phone number is unacceptable.         
BOX 5-6  PATIENT CONFIDENTIALITY GUIDELINES 
   b      Modiﬁ ed from Massachusetts General Hospital, Department of Radiology:  Patient conﬁ dentiality guide,  Boston, 
2006, Author. 

===== pdf p130 =====
111CHAPTER   5     Truthfulness and Confi  dentiality
it is libel. The publisher must be at fault at least to the degree of negligence. Harm must 
have resulted from the publication of the false and defamatory statement. Because the 
statement must be false, the truth is a total defense to a charge of defamation. However, 
a jury trial may be necessary to determine the truth. 
If the false statement concerns criminal activity; a loathsome disease such as AIDS 
or venereal disease; business, trade, or professional misdeeds; or unchastity, no speciﬁ c 
injury need be proved. These situations are termed  slander per se or libel per se. Because 
no injury must be proven in libel or slander per se, the only facts to be proved are that a 
false and defamatory statement or writing was made to another person and the teller or 
writer was at least negligent in telling it. 13            
     SUMMARY 
       •   Imaging professionals are expected to tell the truth in situations in which others 
have a reasonable expectation of the truth. The location of the communication, 
the roles the communicators have in relationship to one another, and the nature 
of the material to be communicated are determining factors in the expectation of 
truth. Contract relationships and special needs are factors that determine whether 
a person has a right to information. 
     •   Of all the types of obligatory secrets —natural, promised, and professional —  
 professional secrecy is the most important because of the damages incurred as 
a result of its violation. In certain instances, professional secrets may be shared. 
This occurs most often when the good to be gained by sharing the  information
 outweighs the evil of violating conﬁ  dentiality, when the law indicates that it 
must be shared, or when special relationships indicate a need for an 
exception. 
     •   The imaging professional has a clear duty to maintain patient conﬁ dentiality. 
However, a small number of exceptions to this duty exist and require the profes-
sional to disclose conﬁ dential information. Unless a situation meets one of the 
exceptions to the duty of conﬁ dentiality, disclosure may create liability for the 
individual and the facility. 
     •   HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996) has 
established conformity across the United States as to disclosure of health care 
information and clariﬁ es situations for disclosure without patient permission. 
HIPAA has also created or reinforced patient rights to access their own records. 
     •   Guidelines as to when conﬁ dentiality can be breached include the following:
    •   Requirement for patient authorization 
   •   Existence of a statutory duty to disclose 
   •   Duty to warn third parties 
   •   AIDS conﬁ dentiality and reporting     
     •   Although HIPAA has clariﬁ ed the law to some extent regarding disclosure, the 
law concerning AIDS conﬁ dentiality and reporting is not as clear cut as the other 
exceptions to conﬁ dentiality. All states mandate physician reporting to public 
health, but jurisdictions vary as to the duty to inform third parties who may be 
infected. While imaging professionals generally are not involved, the imaging 
professional who also acts as a medical assistant may become involved in dilemmas 

===== pdf p131 =====
112 Ethical and Legal Issues for Imaging Professionals
regarding the duty to disclose and should discover the status of the law in his or her 
jurisdiction. 
     •   HIPAA mandates a speciﬁ c right of patients to access their medical records. 
Some exceptions exist, including psychotherapy notes, information compiled in 
anticipation of litigation, and other statutory exceptions. Imaging professionals 
should know the policy in their facility and department with regard to patients’ 
requests to see their ﬁ lms. 
     •   The torts involved in conﬁ dentiality include defamation and breach of conﬁ dential-
ity. Breach of conﬁ dentiality is a violation of the strict duty of conﬁ dentiality, and 
defamation occurs when a false statement is made to another that harms a person’s 
reputation. 
     •   Oral defamatory statements constitute slander, and written defamatory statements 
constitute libel. Defamatory statements regarding criminal activity; loathsome 
diseases; business, trade, or professional misdeeds; and unchastity constitute slander 
or libel per se; in these situations no speciﬁ c injury need be proved.     
   REFERENCES  
           1 .      Garrett  T .  M .    ,   Baillie  H . W .   ,   Garrett  R . M .     :      Healthcare ethics, principles and problems   , ed 2 ,  Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ , 1993 , Prentice Hall       .
           2 .      American Hospital Association   :      V alues in conﬂ ict: resolving ethical issues in hospital care. Report of the Special 
Committee on Biomedical Ethics   ,  Chicago , 1985 , Author       .
           3 .      Furrow  B . R .    ,   Greaney  T . L .     ,  Johnson  S . H .    ,     et al:       Health law: cases, materials and problems   , ed 5 ,  St Paul, Minn ,
  2004 , West       .
           4 .    Tarasoff v Regents of the University of California , 551 P .2d 334 (Cal. 1976).   
           5 .    Thapar v Zezulka , 994 S.W. 2d 635 (Tex. 1999).   
           6 .    Nasser v Parker , 249 Va. 172, 455 S.E.2d 502 (1995).   
           7 .      White  J . G .    :   Physicians’ liability for breach of conﬁ dentiality: beyond the limitations of the privacy tort   ,      SC 
Law Rev   49   (  5  )   :   1271     , 1998   .
           8 .   American Medical Association Council on Scientiﬁ  c Affairs:  Universal screening of pregnant women for 
HIV infection, Report 1-01, Chicago, 2001, Author.   
           9 .      Rinaldi  R . C .     :      HIV blood test counseling: AMA physician guidelines   ,  Chicago , 1988 , American Medical Asso-
ciation      .
        10 .    Humphers v First Interstate Bank of Oregon , 696 P .2d 527, 1985.   
        11 .    Doe v Roe , 400 N.Y. Supp. 2d 668, 1977.   
        12 .    Doe v Roe, No. 0369 N.Y. App. Div. 4th Jud. Dept., May 28, 1993.   
        13 .   Code of Federal Regulation, Title 42, Part 2 (1985).   
        14 .      Schwartz  V .   ,   Kelly  K .   ,   Partlett  D .    :      Prosser, Wade, and Schwartz: cases and materials on torts   , ed 10 ,  Westbury, 
NY , 2000 , Foundation Press       .       
      1    Deﬁ ne truthfulness. 
  2
    Expectations of truth vary with which three conditions?
 
   a.   __________ 
  b.   __________ 
   c.   __________     
  3    The right to the truth is determined by the __________ __________. 
of the patient in many nonmedical situations (such as in pr
eparing for death). 
  4    Informed consent and the need to make treatment decisions are examples of 
conditions for the __________ __________ __________ __________. 
REVIEW QUESTIONS

===== pdf p132 =====
113CHAPTER   5     Truthfulness and Confi  dentiality
  5    __________ is concerned with the keeping of secr ets. 
  6    List the three types of obligatory secrets:
    a.   __________
 
  b.   __________ 
   c.   __________     
  7    The most binding obligatory secret is the __________. 
  8    Descr
ibe the most common exceptions to conﬁ dentiality.  
  9    According to the AHA Committee on Biomedical Ethics, duties to disclose 
patient information exist in which situations? 
   
  10    Which of the following are origins of the duty of conﬁ dentiality?
    a.
   Right to privacy 
  b.   Statutes 
   c.   Ethical obligations 
   d.   Breach of contract issues 
   e.   All of the above     
     11     True or False  The imaging professional must always tell the whole truth. 
  
   12     True or False The imaging professional has an obligation to the patient, 
profession,
 and society to maintain conﬁ dentiality. 
     13     True or False An imaging professional who ﬁ  nds himself or herself in the r ole of 
the patient should not expect the same degree of conﬁ dentiality. 
     14     True or False If the risk of keeping a secret outweighs the harm to the patient, 
no ethical decision making is necessar
y. 
     15     True or False A deontologist believes that stricter rules of right and wrong 
should be used in keeping information conﬁ dential. 
 
    16     True or False The duty of patient conﬁ  dentialit y is clear, and courts allow 
compensation for breach of conﬁ dentiality. 
     17     True or False  Imaging professionals owe an absolute duty of patient 
conﬁ dentiality
. 
     18     True or False Truth is a total defense against allegations of 
defamation. 
 
    19     True or False Defamatory comments regarding a person’s AIDS status are 
slander per se,
 and damages would not have to be proved. 
     20     True or False Conﬁ  dentialit y of drug and alcohol abuse treatment information is 
mandated by the federal government. 
     21     True or False Virtually all requests by third parties for records come from new 
health car
e providers. 
     22     True or False Imaging professionals do not have to worry about statutory 
repor
ting because this duty lies only with physicians. 
     23     True or False  The duty to warn third parties extends to the imaging 
professional.
 
     24     True or False  Imaging professionals when working in clinics and fulﬁ  lling 
the role of medic
al assistant may have to deal with warning people at risk for 
contagious diseases in accordance with the privacy policies surrounding this 
information. 
     25     True or False The existence of legislation mandating strict conﬁ  dentiality 
r
egarding information about patients’ AIDS, HIV, and ARC status means that 
disclosure is never appropriate. 

===== pdf p133 =====
114 Ethical and Legal Issues for Imaging Professionals
      1    What is the difference between not telling the whole truth and telling a lie? Why 
might one of these be admissible? 
  2    Cite a situation in which the place of comm
unication is inappropr iate for an 
expectation of truth in medical imaging. 
  3    Discuss the differences and similarities between natural and promised secr ets. 
  4    If you were HIV positive, do you think your patients or employer would have the 
right to know? 
Why or why not? 
  5    Should a parent have the right to know a child’s physical condition if it involves 
treatment? W
hy or why not? 
  6    Deﬁ ne conﬁ dentiality . 
  7    Identify exceptions to the duty to conﬁ dentiality.  
  8    Consider the following situation: With the health care system changing and 
third-party payers becoming str
icter about coverage, imaging professionals (like 
other people) are concerned with their own health care services. Do you think 
your third-party payer has a right to know your health history and present 
conditions if they involve a communicable disease or drug history? Should you 
be able to expect privileged communication between you and your physician? 
Justify your answers. A group discussion may follow in which each person lists the 
consequences of the decision and possible alternatives. 
CRITICAL THINKING        Questions & Activities
     26    HIPAA stands for:
    a.   
Health Insurance Private Account Association 
  b.   Health Insurance Proﬁ t Accountability Act 
   c.   Health Information Portability and Accountability Act 
   d.   Helping Inform Physicians About Alcohol Abuse     
     27     True or False State law overrides HIPAA regulations. 
  
   28     True or False Patients always have an absolute right to their records. 
  
   29     True or False VA hospitals are exempt from HIPAA regulations. 
  
   30     True or False Imaging professionals should feel free to show patients their ﬁ  lms 
and answer questions about them. 
 
    31     True or False Under HIPAA, patients have the right to sue. 
  
   32    HIPAA’s purposes include the following:
    a.   
To give patients a right of access to their records 
  b.   To create a national framework for privacy regulations 
   c.   To attempt to restore trust in health care delivery of information 
   d.   All of the above     
     33     True or False Under HIPAA, when records are requested, all medical records of 
that patient are pr
ovided. 
     34     True or False Under HIPAA, all requests for information require patient 
authoriz
ation. 
     35     True or False Under HIPAA, patients have the right to see their psychotherapy 
notes. 
 
    36     True or False  Health care plans may decide if they want to participate in the 
HIP
AA regulations.     

===== pdf p134 =====
115CHAPTER   5     Truthfulness and Confi  dentiality
  9    Discuss situations that may potentially involve defamatory statements about 
fello
w employees or patients. 
     10    Discuss the devastation a negligent breach of conﬁ dence may c ause, such as in the 
scenario involving the dentist, Mary Smith. 
     11    Does the facility you are afﬁ liated with have a policy r egarding HIV-infected 
workers? If it does not, should it? Is protection of the patient more important 
than the rights of HIV-infected staff members? 
     12    Discuss the situation of an HIV-infected imaging professional who intends 
to put a student at risk through unpr
otected sexual intercourse. Does another 
imaging professional’s duty to warn fall under the law or is it only an ethical 
obligation?
     13    Play out a scenario in which a patient wants to see her x-ray ﬁ  lms, an imaging 
professional who believes patients should have a r
ight to access shows her the 
ﬁ  lms, and the patient starts demanding that the imaging professional answer 
questions regarding the outcome of the study, what it means, and possible 
treatments. Discuss a better way to handle the situation and play the scenario 
again.     
CRITICAL THINKING Questions & Activities —cont’d

===== pdf p135 =====
116
 6   ␣      DEATH AND DYING 
  Death is a friend of ours; and he that is not ready to entertain him 
is not at home.  
 FRANCIS BACON 
Chapter Outline
     Ethical Issues
   Value of Life 
  Deﬁ nitions of Death 
  The Patient 
  Sanctity of Human Life 
  Suicide 
  Imaging Professionals and Suicide 
  Euthanasia 
  Patients’ Rights Regarding Euthanasia 
  Advance Directives and Surrogates 
  Quality of Life 
  Ethics Committees and Services for Patients with 
Terminal Illnesses 
  Family in Death and Dying     
   Legal Issues
   Deﬁ nitions of Death 
  Determination of Death 
  Directives 
  Physician-Assisted Suicide 
  Competence and Life-Sustaining Treatment 
  No-Code Orders 
  Living Wills 
  Durable Powers of Attorney for Health Care 
  Family Consent Laws 
  Uniform Health Care Decisions Act 
  Absence of Advance Directives 
  Patients in a Persistent Vegetative State 
  Patients Who Have Never Been Competent      
Learning Objectives
     •   Provide deﬁ  nitions of life and death. 
     •   Differentiate between the patient’s and the 
 imaging professional’s role in death and dying. 
     •   Identify the physical and ethical differences 
between active and passive suicide. 
     •   State a perceived need for euthanasia. 
     •   Develop arguments for and against the right 
to die. 
     •   Deﬁ ne the meaning of quality of life and explain 
what affects it. 
     •   List reasons for ethics committees. 
     •   Cite the basis for the patient’s right to forgo 
life-sustaining treatment. 
     •   Deﬁ ne and understand differences between 
a persistent vegetative state and a minimally 
conscious state. 
     •   Deﬁ ne how death is determined. 
     •   Deﬁ ne life-sustaining treatment and its exclusions. 
     •   Explain the difference between living wills and 
durable powers of attorney. 
     •   Identify the limitations of living wills. 
     •   Deﬁ ne the advantages of durable powers of attorney. 
     •   Compare the ways in which powers of attorney 
inﬂ  uence the decision-making process of ancillary 
people such as physicians, ministers, and speciﬁ ed 
family members and friends. 
     •   Identify the differences between persons in a per-
sistent vegetative state and those in a minimally 
conscious state. 
     •   Explain the difference between competency and 
decisional capacity. 
     •   Contrast the treatment of persons who have never 
been competent and competent persons who have 
become incompetent. 
 After completing the chapter, the reader will be able to perform the following:  