
===== pdf p91 =====
72
 4   ␣       PATIENT AUTONOMY AND INFORMED CONSENT 
  The last of the human freedoms [is] to choose one’s attitude in 
any given set of circumstances, to choose one’s own way.  
 VIKTOR FRANKL 
Chapter Outline
     Ethical Issues 
   Deﬁ nition of Autonomy 
  Patient Care Partnership 
  Information Delivery 
  Complications of Autonomy, Informed Consent, 
and Right of Refusal 
  Veriﬁ cation of Informed Consent 
  Competence and Incompetence Surrogacy 
  Obstacles to Autonomy and Informed Consent 
  Respect for Autonomy 
  Therapeutic Privilege 
  Emergency Situations 
  Competence and Advance Directives 
  Application of Ethical Theories to Autonomy     
   Legal Issues 
   Tort Law 
  Simple Consent 
  Intentional Torts 
  Unintentional Torts 
  Informed Consent      
Learning Objectives
     •   Describe the relationship between autonomy, the 
respect for autonomy, and informed consent. 
     •   Identify the stresses involved in granting informed 
consent and autonomy. 
     •   List methods of verifying informed consent. 
     •   Deﬁ ne surrogacy. 
     •   Compare and contrast competence and incompe-
tence. 
     •   Correlate coercion, paternalism, and therapeutic 
privilege. 
     •   Explain why emergency situations and certain 
facilities may alter informed consent processes. 
     •   Identify ethical theories that may be implemented 
to facilitate problem solving. 
     •   Give examples of the difference between inten-
tional and unintentional torts and ways the 
 perception of intent rather than the actual intent 
may be the basis for allegations. 
     •   Provide examples of simple consent as it relates to 
assault, battery, and false imprisonment. 
     •   Deﬁ  ne informed consent. 
     •   Differentiate standards of care with regard to the 
duty of informed consent. 
     •   Deﬁ ne and contrast the roles of the physician and 
the imaging professional in informed consent. 
     •   Identify the important but limited role of the 
consent form. 
 After completing this chapter, the reader will be able to perform the following:  
Key Terms
   advance directives 
 assault 
autonomy
 battery 
competence
 consent forms 
false imprisonment 
 informed consent 
intentional torts 
simple consent 
unintentional torts 

===== pdf p92 =====
 Professional Profi  le 
       A client with cancer comes to the radiotherapy clinic 
at a most challenging time in his or her life. For many, 
it is a time ﬁ  lled with emotional anxiety, social disrup-
tion, physical strain, and uncertainty. My primary role 
as a radiation therapist is to deliver a precise amount 
of radiation to the cancer, and in doing so try to bring 
about a positive change and a return to normalcy 
for the client. How my goal is achieved depends on 
many ethical and legal issues that provide the frame-
work for all of my professional responsibilities. 
Within my scope of practice I need to be intimately 
familiar with the protocols, codes, guidelines, and leg-
islation that outline the speciﬁ c techniques I perform 
as a radiation therapist but also what I ought to do 
as a health care provider. There are many scenarios 
in radiation therapy where there are ethical and legal 
concerns. These issues may be very clear but at times 
may be elusive and complex. Here are some situations 
from my experience that demonstrate these concerns:
      •   Signing my initials in a logbook for a daily 
quality assurance procedure that was performed 
on a treatment unit 
     •   Ensuring that I have the correct client when 
retrieving him or her from the waiting room 
     •   Asking a client for permission for a student to 
participate in his or her simulator planning pro-
cedure and then balancing the needs for student 
learning, client comfort, and efﬁ ciency 
     •   Reporting unusual or unexpected variances in 
the treatment process 
     •  Counseling a client at his or her level within my 
scope of practice, such as educating a client on the 
anticipated side effects, offering emotional sup-
port, and providing referrals to other departments 
     •   Covering up all patient lists and hospital 
records when the family of a client watches the 
client on a CCTV monitor in the control area 
during treatment 
     •   Deciding during portal imaging if a ﬁ eld 
border deviating 3 mm away from the expected 
position is acceptable and whether or not to 
proceed with irradiation 
     •   Communicating with the family members of 
a client from a non-Western culture who does 
not speak English and is unaware that he or she 
is being treated for cancer 
     •  Treating a comatose client for an oncologic 
emergency without having prior written consent 
for treatment from either the client or a  substitute 
decision maker (in radiotherapy it is rare not to 
have written consent at the time of treatment)    
These situations are related to concepts of informed 
consent, client conﬁ dentiality, or professional practice, 
all of which have ethical and legal considerations. As 
an instructor, I emphasize to students that poorly made 
decisions can potentially have serious implications. To 
the client, these consequences could be disastrous: 
breach of conﬁ  dentiality, physical harm, severe and de-
bilitating radiation side effects, and radiation-induced 
death. To the hospital, damage to its reputation could 
be irreparable. To the therapist, it could mean the end 
of a professional career, loss of income, and criminal 
convictions. Health care workers are fully accountable 
for their actions (or inactions) and must always exer-
cise diligence and vigilance in the care of the client. 
The perspectives of care can vary, and I have 
learned that what is important to me as a radiation 
therapist may be much less important to the cli-
ent. For example, I value the client’s compliance in 
attending daily treatments because daily fractions 
help to increase  tumor cell kill. However, for some 
clients, visiting the clinic every day for treatment 
may not be a priority because of other competing 
interests such as work obligations, family schedules, 
and transportation  issues. Having cancer is only 
another part of the client’s life. The  ethical and 
legal considerations become more a pparent when 
the standard policies and procedures do not ﬁ t the 
needs or expectations of the client. I have a moral 
obligation to ensure not only that the client is being 
cared for, but also that the client feels cared for. 
While I work within a multidisciplinary team 
of highly trained health care workers and support 
staff, the clients are the leaders of the team. They 
rightfully demand superb health care while expect-
ing good outcomes and positive experiences. For 
the health professional, this comes about through 
exercising good judgment, employing the appropri-
ate skills, and carefully reﬂ  ecting upon one’s own 
limitations and strengths.   
   Martin J. .      Chai  ,   MRT(T), BSc, MTS  
  Faculty, 
Medical Radiation Sciences, 
Department of Radiation Oncology 
Faculty of Medicine,  
  The Michener Institute for Applied Health Sciences and 
The University of T oronto, T oronto, Ontario   

===== pdf p93 =====
74 Ethical and Legal Issues for Imaging Professionals
                            ETHICAL ISSUES 
  Informed consent is a common concern in all the imaging modalities. Imaging profes-
sionals must be proﬁ cient in the recitation of facts and ﬁ  gures required to inform the 
patient. Health care providers, however, should also be able to provide patients with a 
process that renders them truly knowledgeable about procedures and their alternatives.    
During the early stages of development within the medical community, the patient’s 
autonomy was not a serious consideration. Physicians were expected to be omniscient 
and were rarely questioned. They acted as the “fathers” of their clientele. This paternal-
ism and the invocation of therapeutic privilege were standard professional philosophies. 
As years passed and patients became more aware of their rights and privileges, however, 
the medical community developed new methods of informing patients. The emphasis 
on patient autonomy and informed consent has come from many areas (     Box 4-1 ).    
Some physicians still ﬁ  nd the model of patient education difﬁ  cult because they 
believe that the informational process complicates health care and brings their expertise 
into question. Fortunately, however, most physicians and institutions understand the 
relevance of informed consent and patients’ rights. 
Maintaining patient autonomy and obtaining valid informed consent are vital in the 
vascular imaging laboratory. Imaging professionals routinely visit patients before pro-
cedures and explain the processes, contrast media involved, and physical sensations to 
which the patient will be subjected. They may also discuss imaging procedures with 
patients during transportation and preparation. These are important parts of the infor-
mational process and are vital to the maintenance of patient autonomy. Occasionally 
the imaging professional may be required to witness the signing of a written informed 
consent form. Other imaging procedures, including ﬂ uoroscopic studies, vascular stud-
ies, and a variety of other noninvasive and invasive examinations, often require the tech-
nologist to facilitate the informed consent process. Imaging professionals must decide 
on the basis of personal and professional parameters whether this is appropriate, and 
they must remember that the physician is ultimately responsible for the informed con-
sent process. 
      INFORMED CONSENT 
 Informed consent is the 
written assent of a patient 
to r
eceive a proposed 
treatment; adequate 
information is essential for 
the patient to give truly 
informed consent.    
      AUTONOMY 
 Autonomy is the concept 
that patients are to be 
treat
ed as individuals and 
informed about procedures 
to facilitate appropriate 
decisions.    
           Maintenance of patients’ rights 
  Provision of education to facilitate consent 
  Promotion of human dignity 
  Determination of incompetence 
  Advocacy of surrogates 
  Elimination of attitudes of paternalism 
  Clariﬁ cation of unclear communication involving therapeutic privilege 
  Strategies for dealing with emergency situations 
  Use of compatible parameters for consent in speciﬁ c health care facilities 
  Education regarding the ethical theories involved in patient autonomy 
and informed consent      
BOX 4-1  CRUCIAL ELEMENTS IN PATIENT AUTONOMY 
AND INFORMED CONSENT
 

===== pdf p94 =====
75CHAPTER   4     Patient Autonomy and Informed Consent
     DEFINITION OF AUTONOMY 
  Autonomy means that “one human person, precisely as a human person, dares not have 
the authority and should not have power over another human person. In a medical 
sense, a patient will not be treated without informed consent of his or her lawful sur-
rogates, except in narrowly deﬁ ned emergencies.” 1    
     PATIENT CARE PARTNERSHIP 
The patient’s right to information is important in considerations of autonomy. The 
American Hospital Association has established a patient care partnership document 
(see p. 255), 2   which is to be given to hospitalized patients to help them understand the 
expectations, rights, and responsibilities regarding their health care. 
Expectations should include high-quality hospital care delivered with skill, compas-
sion, and respect. Patients have the right to know the identity of physicians, nurses, and 
other health care providers. They also have the right to know if they are being treated 
by students, residents, or other trainees. Patients should expect a clean and safe environ-
ment, including special policies and procedures to avoid mistakes in care and ensure 
freedom from abuse or neglect. 
Patients should expect to be involved in decision making regarding care. This includes dis-
cussing medical conditions and information about medically appropriate treatment choices. 
Patients should be informed of the beneﬁ  ts and risks of each treatment, whether that treat-
ment is experimental or part of a research study, what can reasonably be expected from the 
treatment, and any long-term effects it might have. The ﬁ nancial consequences of using 
noncovered services or out-of-network providers should be explained. Patients should expect 
to be informed of what they and their families will need to do upon leaving the hospital. 
When entering the hospital, the patient signs a general consent-for-treatment form. 
Speciﬁ c treatments such as surgery, invasive procedures, or experimental treatments 
may require speciﬁ c consent, called  informed consent, which conﬁ rms in writing what 
is planned and the patient is agreeing to as part of that plan. This process protects the 
patient’s right to consent to or refuse a treatment. The physician must also explain the 
consequences of refusing recommended treatment. 
To make good decisions regarding care, caregivers need complete and correct infor-
mation from patients about their health and coverage. The patient is responsible for 
delivering this information, which includes past medical history, past allergic reac-
tions, medicines and dietary supplements, and speciﬁ c health plan information, as well 
as health care goals, values, or spiritual beliefs important to the patient’s well-being. 
Patients should make available to the physician and the hospital any documents such as 
a living will or advance directive regarding health care decisions. 
Patients’ privacy is protected by state and federal laws, as well as hospital operating 
policies. Patients receive a notice of privacy practice document that outlines the way 
information is used, disclosed, and safeguarded. This also explains how a patient can 
obtain a copy of the information regarding care. 
Patients can expect assistance with treatment plans when leaving the hospital, includ-
ing arrangement of follow-up care and disclosure of any ﬁ  nancial interest in any such 
referrals. They can also expect hospitals to ﬁ  le claims with health insurers, Medicare, 
and Medicaid, as well as provide help with needed documentation, explanation of hos-
pital bills, and insurance coverage. 

===== pdf p95 =====
76 Ethical and Legal Issues for Imaging Professionals
     INFORMATION DELIVERY 
The way in which information is given depends on the criteria used to inform the patient. 
The following four potentially conﬂ icting rules may guide the physician or other health 
care provider in explaining information to patients 1  :
       1.   Patient preference rule 
   2.   Professional custom rule 
   3.   Prudent person rule 
   4.   Subjective substantial disclosure rule       
Institutional rules must also be taken into account. 
     Patient Preference Rule 
The patient preference rule requires health care professionals to tell patients what they 
want to know. For example, the patient may prefer to know how the procedure may aid 
in the diagnostic process or may ask a radiation therapy professional how the treatment 
will affect the patient’s quality of life. The health professional will then do his or her best 
to communicate this information in the patient education process. 
     Professional Custom Rule 
The professional custom rule states that the health care professional should give the 
patient the information normally given to patients in similar situations. For example, 
a patient may have no speciﬁ c requests for information concerning scheduled ultraso-
nography. This does not necessarily indicate the patient’s lack of concern. He or she 
may just not know what to ask. The ultrasonographer would then provide the patient 
with the typical information concerning the examination. Patient education that enables 
the patient to comply with the requests of the imaging professional will also make the 
examination more understandable to the patient. 
     Prudent Person Rule 
The prudent person rule, or reasonable patient standard, measures the physician’s disclo-
sure to the patient based on the patient’s need for information to make decisions regard-
ing treatment. 1   The imaging professional must consider the information the patient 
needs to make informed decisions concerning a procedure. In the previous examples, the 
imaging professional or physician would have to decide how much the patient needs to 
know before he or she can make an adequate informed consent decision. 
     Subjective Substantial Disclosure Rule 
The subjective substantial disclosure rule encourages the physician to disseminate all 
information important to the individual patient. In responding to the previous exam-
ples, the physician would feel obliged to explain  all the possible ramiﬁ cations of the 
examinations to the patient. 
The prudent person rule addresses many of the important elements of informed 
consent. A combination of the prudent person rule and the subjective disclosure rule, 
which requires the physician to communicate meaningfully with the patient, provides 
the information the patient needs to make an informed decision. Such a combination 
ensures that the physician has adequate knowledge about the patient and the patient has 
adequate knowledge about the procedure (     Box 4-2 ). 

===== pdf p96 =====
77CHAPTER   4     Patient Autonomy and Informed Consent
     Institutional Rules Regarding Informed Consent 
Imaging professionals must consider institutional rules concerning a variety of ethical 
issues, including informed consent. During the interview process before employment, 
they should investigate issues of institutional ethics and values before making choices 
concerning their abilities to function and provide patient care within the parameters 
provided by the institution.   
     COMPLICATIONS OF AUTONOMY , INFORMED CONSENT, 
AND RIGHT OF REFUSAL 
After examining the issues included in deﬁ ning patient autonomy and protecting patient 
rights, imaging professionals should be able to recognize the dilemmas involved in ensur-
ing informed consent. Whether a patient may ever give truly informed consent is open 
to question. To be totally informed, the patient would need to be educated in many areas 
from anatomy to imaging procedures. Imaging professionals may consider whether this is 
possible or whether informed consent is simply an idealistic (although necessary) ritual. 
They must also recognize their responsibility in the process of obtaining informed con-
sent. Even if the procedure is complicated to explain, imaging professionals should make 
every effort to help patients become more knowledgeable. Until patients become respon-
sible for providing and obtaining information concerning their medical procedures, a truly 
informed, educated consent that ensures autonomy may never be realized. 
The Patient Self-Determination Act of 1991 helps ensure patient autonomy 3  :
Heeding the principle of autonomy  … means that imaging professionals should respect a 
patient’s choice to refuse treatments. The basic human right of all patients to refuse treatment 
was formally legislated by the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (1990). The Patient Self-
Determination Act became effective December 1, 1991, and requires all health care institu-
tions receiving Medicare or Medicaid funds to inform patients that they have the right to 
refuse medical and surgical care and the right to initiate a written advance directive (i.e., 
a written or oral statement by which a competent person makes known his or her treatment 
preferences and/or designates a surrogate decision maker in the event he or she should become 
unable to make medical decisions on his or her own behalf [     Box 4-3 ]). Hospitals, home health 
care agencies, and managed care organizations are required to make this information available, 
in writing, at the time the patient comes under an agency’s care. 
     VERIFICATION OF INFORMED CONSENT 
One ethical challenge inherent in many imaging procedures is the appropriateness of 
the veriﬁ cation of informed consent. Imaging professionals should always be available to 
answer patients’ questions concerning their procedures. However, questions concerning 
           Patient preference rule — provides information patients want to know 
  Professional custom rule —provides the information normally given to patients 
  Prudent person rule —provides the information patients need to know to consent 
to or refuse treatment 
  Subjective substantial disclosure rule —provides patients with all information 
  Combination of rules —provides information without overburdening the patient      
BOX 4-2  RULES FOR EXPLAINING PROCEDURES 

===== pdf p97 =====
78 Ethical and Legal Issues for Imaging Professionals
speciﬁ cs of informed consent such as alternative therapies, failure rate, risks, or other 
subjects should always be directed to the patient’s physician. 
The physician has a crucial role in the process of obtaining informed consent. Because 
of their knowledge and expertise, physicians bear the responsibility for informing 
patients concerning procedures. To facilitate the informed consent process, the imaging 
professional should refer the patient to the physician if the professional feels questions 
about the procedure are out of his or her ﬁ  eld of expertise. 
An important ethical consideration is whether imaging professionals should allow 
themselves to be placed in the position of witnessing the patient’s signature on the 
informed consent form. Imaging professionals are commonly given the responsibility of 
getting the patient to sign the imaging procedure consent form. If they are not present 
when the patient’s physician presumably gives the necessary instructions and explana-
tions to the patient, they are qualiﬁ ed only to witness the fact that the patient has signed 
the form. 
Many imaging professionals involved in carrying out informed consent procedures ﬁ nd 
themselves in the difﬁ cult situation of determining how much of the responsibility for 
informed consent is theirs. Nevertheless, probably few have ever questioned this process. 
Many student imaging professionals are required to explain the injection of contrast media 
and possible reactions to patients as part of their clinical objectives. Although students 
must learn this skill, imaging professionals may need to consider whether this important 
patient education duty should be left to students and whether this is conducive to the 
patient’s truly informed consent and the imaging professional’s protection from liability. 
An example of the difﬁ  culties inherent in ensuring patient autonomy and eliciting 
truly informed consent may be observed in a ﬂ  uoroscopic imaging suite in which gas-
trointestinal procedures are performed. The patient may have been informed, but can 
anyone ever be ready for an air contrast colon examination? Patients subjected to this 
procedure are already afraid, sick, and in pain and may feel as though they have no 
control over their care. Imaging professionals need to consider ways of facing this chal-
lenge and informing patients as fully as possible about an often dehumanizing procedure 
without completely discouraging them from an examination that may have enormous 
           Provision of written information to adult patients about their rights to make 
medical decisions, including the right to accept or refuse treatment and the 
right to formulate advance directives 
  Documentation in each patient’s record regarding whether the patient has 
executed an advance directive 
  Implementation of written policies regarding the various types of advance directives 
  Ensuring of compliance with state laws regarding medical treatment decisions 
and advance directives 
  Elimination of discrimination against individuals regarding their treatment deci-
sions made through an advance directive 
  Provision of education for staff members and the community on ethical and 
legal issues concerning advance directives        
a  From the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990, Sections 4206 and 4751, Public Law 101-508, 
November 5, 1990. 
BOX 4-3  REQUIREMENTS OF THE PATIENT SELF-DETERMINATION ACT 

===== pdf p98 =====
79CHAPTER   4     Patient Autonomy and Informed Consent
diagnostic beneﬁ ts. Throughout all of this, the dignity and autonomy of the patient 
must be preserved. 
An imaging professional may overhear a co-worker speaking disrespectfully about 
an unconscious or deaf patient. Because respect for freedom and privacy is ultimately 
rooted in the dignity of each person, the maintenance of autonomy requires health care 
providers to respect all individuals, even those who are not currently capable of free 
choice.1   In short, people do not lose their dignity because they are unconscious, in a 
coma, or out of contact with reality. Such patients present special difﬁ culties, but they 
must nevertheless be respected. Dignity and autonomy do not stem from a person’s abil-
ity to function in an imaging suite; instead, the clinical area should accommodate itself 
to the individual’s limitations. 
     COMPETENCE AND INCOMPETENCE SURROGACY 
  Competence is a necessary element in informed consent. In the medical setting, com-
petence entails the ability to make appropriate choices and consider their consequences. 
A patient’s competence may be temporarily compromised by prescription or over-the-
counter drugs. In this condition of short-term incompetence, the patient may require a 
surrogate or postponement of the procedure until the patient is competent. Incompe-
tence is difﬁ cult to prove. An evaluation of the patient’s ability to make decisions is an 
important component in determining competence.    
Imaging professionals should consider methods of dealing with patients who are 
temporarily incompetent or rendered permanently incompetent by brain damage, devel-
opmental disabilities, dementia, or Alzheimer’s disease. Such patients do not have less 
dignity or less right to be informed. Even the most incompetent person has basic human 
dignity, and imaging professionals must keep this in mind. 
Questions regarding methods for determining competence and adequately informing 
patients who are incompetent often lead to a consideration of surrogacy, or the appoint-
ment of a person or persons to make decisions regarding care in the name of the patient. 
A surrogate may be a parent, an individual named by the patient while competent, or a 
person or persons appointed by the courts. Surrogates may be involved in the determi-
nation of competence and in the informed consent process. As such, they may pose an 
obstacle to autonomy, especially if the patient did not give advance directives regarding 
personal wishes. No person can ever truly know the wishes of another; nevertheless, sur-
rogates must do their best to surmise the patient’s wishes. 
     OBSTACLES TO AUTONOMY AND INFORMED CONSENT 
Undue inﬂ  uences that may restrict the patient’s choices are a hindrance to autonomy. Ill 
patients may feel pushed into decisions out of concern for their health, future, and family 
members. A patient’s family members or physician may pressure the patient because of 
personal or professional feelings concerning the patient’s welfare. Imaging professionals 
must be careful not to add inﬂ  uences that may render patients, who have already expe-
rienced a loss of personal freedom, unable to make decisions concerning their care. The 
imaging suite environment itself may negatively inﬂ uence the patient; its intimidating 
atmosphere may frighten the patient past the point of sound decision making. Imaging 
professionals must therefore make every effort to calm and reassure the patient. At the 
same time, they should recognize that no person is ever completely free from outside inﬂ u-
ences and that truly informed, educated consent and autonomy may be impossible. 
      COMPETENCE 
 Competence is the ability to 
make choices.    

===== pdf p99 =====
80 Ethical and Legal Issues for Imaging Professionals
Given the increased diversity of the patient population, language and culture are 
often barriers to autonomy and informed consent. These issues are discussed thoroughly 
in Chapter 9 .
A lack of time can inﬂ  uence the completeness of the informed consent process. 
Imaging professionals often face this problem, but they cannot sacriﬁ ce proper patient 
communication because of time constraints. 
Lack of communication on the part of the patient or professional may interfere with 
the informed consent process. In this situation the professional should elicit feedback 
from the patient to verify that the information was understood. 
Serious obstacles to autonomy and informed consent may spring from health care 
providers, including physicians, nurses, and allied health professionals. Because of their 
education and experience, they often believe they know what is best for patients. They 
become confused and sometimes angry when patients refuse treatment or question their 
explanations. An attitude of paternalism is unhealthy for autonomy. Patients who per-
ceive such an attitude on the part of the health care provider may come to distrust the 
provider. An irritated, know-it-all imaging professional may frighten or annoy a patient 
out of the examination room and past the point of diagnosis. Clear communication 
between the provider and patient is crucial, and the imaging professional has an obliga-
tion to communicate properly and not merely spout facts. If the patient does not under-
stand, informed consent is not possible. Imaging professionals should remember to talk 
to  patients, not  at  them. 
Imaging professionals may become so accustomed to the repetition of information 
that they do not truly listen to patients. Students especially may be so involved in cover-
ing all the information that they sound like waiters explaining the catch of the day, not 
professionals describing the possible complications of a medical procedure. Patients are 
usually frightened, and when asked if they understand, they may nod yes with heads 
empty of actual understanding. 
     RESPECT FOR AUTONOMY 
Autonomy, surrogacy, informed consent, and the obstacles to each should continually 
remind imaging professionals that they must have an ongoing respect for the self of 
the patient. Jonsen, Siegler, and Winslade 4   provide seven points to enable the health 
care professional to maintain respect for autonomy. They have been modiﬁ ed below for 
imaging professionals:
       1.   Is the patient mentally capable and legally competent? Is there any evidence of 
incapacity that would affect the imaging procedure? 
   2.   If competent, has the imaging patient expressed any preferences for the imaging 
procedure? 
   3.   Does the imaging patient understand the beneﬁ  ts and the risks, and has he or 
she given consent? 
   4.   If the patient is in need of a surrogate, is the surrogate using the appropriate 
standards for decision making? 
   5.   Has the imaging patient expressed prior preferences (e.g., advance directives)? 
   6.   If the imaging patient is unable or unwilling to cooperate with the imaging 
procedure, is there a speciﬁ c reason? 
   7.   After a consideration of the ﬁ rst six points, is the patient’s right to choose being 
respected to the extent possible both ethically and legally?       

===== pdf p100 =====
81CHAPTER   4     Patient Autonomy and Informed Consent
The use of these points of respect for autonomy is a valuable tool in ethical and legal 
problem solving. 
     THERAPEUTIC PRIVILEGE 
Physicians and imaging professionals must decide what the patient needs to know. These 
difﬁ cult decisions may raise the issue of therapeutic privilege, a narrowly construed preroga-
tive invoked when health care providers withhold information from patients because they 
believe the information would have adverse effects on the patients’ conditions or health. The 
physician must have reason to believe that the patient would become unusually emotionally 
distraught if the information was disclosed. 5 Physicians and other health care providers may 
believe they are knowledgeable about what the patient can tolerate. They may use this belief 
as a reason to omit information if they think it may have an adverse effect on the patient. 
Imaging professionals who believe they know the way the patient feels better than the patient 
does should reevaluate their omission of information. Therapeutic privilege is used less often 
by caregivers who realize that patients are becoming much more aware of their rights. When 
their autonomy is denied, their ability to give informed consent is impaired. Most patients 
want to be told the truth about their condition. When imaging professionals omit necessary 
information, the result may be deceit, mistrust, and very possibly harm to the patient. 
     EMERGENCY SITUATIONS 
In emergency situations the informed consent process may have to be abandoned to save 
the patient’s life. Imaging professionals may ﬁ  nd themselves in such situations in the 
emergency department. According to the laws of many states, three conditions must be 
present for the omission of informed consent to be justiﬁ ed:
       1.   The patient is incapable of giving consent, and no lawful surrogate is available. 
   2.   Danger to life or risk of a serious impairment to health is apparent. 
   3.   Immediate treatment is necessary to avert these dangers.       
Providing treatment without the patient’s consent may be considered a denial of auton-
omy; however, autonomy is not relevant if the patient dies. In this case autonomy becomes 
a consideration of the patient’s family or surrogate. If the family feels the patient’s rights 
have been denied, they may take legal action. Many emergency room physicians are faced 
with this difﬁ cult situation and the quick but vital decisions it requires. Informed consent 
and autonomy are not always possible in emergency situations. 
     COMPETENCE AND ADVANCE DIRECTIVES 
Certain facilities and situations may pose serious threats to autonomy and informed 
consent. Mental health facilities and nursing homes may compromise the autonomy 
processes. Many patients in these institutions are considered incompetent as a result of 
mental illness or age, although neither of these factors necessarily renders the patient 
incompetent. Many mental health and nursing facilities are now asking competent 
patients to give written  advance directives or assign a surrogate to provide protection 
for the patient and provider if the patient becomes incompetent at a later date.     
     APPLICATION OF ETHICAL THEORIES TO AUTONOMY 
The imaging professional may experience further difﬁ culty in choosing a theory of eth-
ics to apply when considering patient autonomy. The theory of consequentialism (utili-
tarianism) requires the greatest good to be done for the greatest number. Deontology 
      ADVANCE DIRECTIVES 
 An advance directive is a 
predetermined (usually 
wr
itten) choice made 
to inform others of the 
ways in which the patient 
wishes to be treated while 
incompetent.    

===== pdf p101 =====
82 Ethical and Legal Issues for Imaging Professionals
holds that the motives for an action are the most important considerations. Virtue ethics 
invokes practical wisdom and right reason. (See Chapter 1 for a more detailed review of 
ethical theories.) 
Utilitarianism is not very relevant in considerations of autonomy and consent because 
it is generally applied to large numbers of persons. Although the informed consent pro-
cess may affect other persons, the patient has a more immediate interest in understand-
ing the process. The deontologic viewpoint, with its emphasis on motives instead of 
consequences, is difﬁ cult to apply in considerations of the maintenance of a patient’s 
autonomy because in this situation the consequences are crucial. Both utilitarianism and 
deontology assume that people use ethical constructs to address the difﬁ culties involved 
in encouraging the individual’s autonomy while obtaining genuinely informed consent. 
Because moral signiﬁ cance and other factors vary with each individual, however, even 
those using similar constructs may come to differing conclusions. 
Virtue ethics relies on virtues, practical wisdom, and an appreciation of the conse-
quences of actions. This theory is the most adaptable for dealing with the difﬁ  culties 
of patient autonomy because it promotes the dignity of patients and their freedom of 
choice.     
     LEGAL ISSUES 
Patient autonomy is crucial to many legal theories applicable to imaging profession-
als. Consent and informed consent are the two legal issues in which patient autonomy 
is most obvious and necessary. Failure to obtain consent may result in allegations of 
torts such as assault, battery, false imprisonment, and negligence with regard to lack of 
informed consent. These torts and the legal issues regarding consent, informed consent, 
and the imaging professional’s role in both are discussed at length in this chapter. 
       A 90-year-old patient with terminal cancer who is mentally limited, hard of hear-
ing, and visually impaired is scheduled for a double contrast barium enema. Even 
a healthy 20-year-old patient may have difﬁ  culty with this procedure, which is 
embarrassing and often uncomfortable. The imaging professional wonders why 
this terminally ill, feeble, geriatric patient should be forced to endure the pro-
cedure. The professional is not sure that the patient truly understands what it 
entails. The patient may have been inﬂ  uenced by a physician concerned with 
doing everything possible to avoid legal repercussions, and informed consent may 
have been given by a family member who wants to hang on to this elderly relative 
no matter what. If the patient had made himself clearer concerning his wishes 
before the illness became invasive, all the involved parties would not be struggling 
with the implications and consequences of the procedure. 
    Discussion question 
       •   In what way do the three ethical theories address the difﬁ cult decisions 
involved in this scenario?       
 IMAGING SCENARIO   

===== pdf p102 =====
83CHAPTER   4     Patient Autonomy and Informed Consent
     T O R T  L A W  
A tort is a civil wrong for which the law provides a remedy. 5   A tort action is ﬁ  led to 
recover damages for personal injury or property damage occurring from negligent con-
duct or intentional misconduct. Tort law may be divided into two categories — inten-
tional torts and unintentional torts. Intentional torts result when an act is done with 
the intention of causing harm to another. 6   The intentional torts that are most likely to 
have an impact on the provision of medical imaging services are assault, battery, false 
imprisonment, and defamation. Assault, battery, and false imprisonment are discussed 
in this chapter. Defamation is discussed in Chapter 5, which covers truthfulness and 
conﬁ dentiality. 
     SIMPLE CONSENT 
Justice Cardozo stated in the 1914 case  Schloendorff v Society of N.Y. Hospitals that “every 
human being of adult years and sound mind has a right to determine what shall be 
done with his own body; and a surgeon who performs an operation without his consent 
commits an assault for which he is liable in damages.” 7   This court decision provided the 
basis for the concept of consent and established that violation of consent constitutes 
assault and battery. 
A patient must consent to any procedure. This  simple consent does not require 
knowledge of the procedure. It simply means that a patient’s permission must be 
obtained before the procedure can be performed. Consent may be given simply by the 
patient’s getting on the table or stepping up to the chest board. If a patient is in an 
emergency situation, consent need not be asked for or given. Instead, the situation is 
evaluated legally by assessing what a reasonable person would do in a similar situation. 
Again, the applicable standard of care prevails.    
Most problems with simple consent arise when consent is withdrawn by a patient 
or when the boundaries to which the patient has consented are exceeded. This may 
be a difﬁ cult situation to address, because although an imaging professional cannot 
continue a procedure without the patient’s consent, the patient often may be reassured 
by a more thorough explanation of the procedure, and consent can and must again be 
obtained.  
     INTENTIONAL TORTS 
Although the concept that a provider of medical imaging services would intend to harm 
a patient is bizarre, if the patient feels the tort was intended, the determination of intent 
may well be left to a jury. Communication with patients to ensure their understanding is 
the best tool to lessen or decrease the risk of allegations of  intentional torts.   
     Assault and Battery 
An assault is a deliberate act wherein one person threatens to harm another person 
without consent and the victim perceives that the other has the ability to carry out the 
threat. 5  Battery is touching to which the victim has not consented, even if the touching 
may beneﬁ t the patient. 8   For example, assault may be alleged if an imaging professional 
threatens to perform a portable chest x-ray examination on a competent person against 
his or her will. Battery occurs if the x-ray examination is actually performed on the 
competent, unwilling patient.    
      SIMPLE CONSENT 
 Simple consent is the assent 
required of a patient for an
y 
procedure.    
      INTENTIONAL TORTS 
 Intentional torts are wrongs 
resulting from acts done 
with the int
ention of 
causing harm to another.    
      ASSAULT 
 Assault is a deliberate 
act wherein one person 
threat
ens to harm another 
without consent and the 
victim feels the attacker has 
the ability to carry out the 
threat.    
      B A T T E R Y  
 Battery is touching to which 
the victim has not consented.
    

===== pdf p103 =====
84 Ethical and Legal Issues for Imaging Professionals
In situations involving patients who are incompetent or those requiring restraint, the 
law allows providers to touch patients without consent. In these situations consideration 
must be given to four important conditions, as listed in      Box 4-4 .   
Medical immobilization is often needed in the imaging department. This immo-
bilization includes mechanisms usually and customarily applied during diagnostic and 
therapeutic procedures and is considered a regular and usual part of such procedures and 
based on standard practice. Such immobilization to perform effective treatment is not 
considered restraint. 
Restraints are rarely used in the medical imaging department. If the need arises, 
however, imaging professionals must keep in mind that they should be able to justify use 
of restraints according to the four criteria in  Box 4-4 .
When dealing with children, which often necessitates immobilization, imaging 
technologists must communicate clearly with parents. This communication not only 
increases parental conﬁ dence in the imaging professionals but also minimizes the risk 
of litigation. Adequate communication should include an explanation of the necessity 
for immobilization to decrease radiation exposure and obtain optimal studies, reassur-
ance that the immobilization equipment used is the least intrusive, and a guarantee that 
immobilization will be used only when necessary and discontinued as soon as possible. 
     False Imprisonment 
Although false imprisonment seems to be a ridiculous allegation to make against an 
imaging professional, certain circumstances in the medical imaging setting may give rise to 
such allegations. False imprisonment occurs when a person is unlawfully conﬁ  ned within a 
ﬁ xed area. 7   The conﬁ ned person must be aware of the conﬁ nement or must be harmed by 
the conﬁ nement. Even if the health care provider does not intend harm, these allegations 
can be made if the patient perceives the acts to be done with the intent of harm.    
For false imprisonment to be found, plaintiffs must prove that they were restrained 
either physically or by threat or intimidation and that they did not consent to the restraint. 
Because restraints are often important and necessary tools in obtaining successful medi-
cal images or therapeutic treatment, a successful false imprisonment suit would require 
the jury to ﬁ nd that an imaging professional acted in an unreasonable, unjustiﬁ ed, and 
unprivileged manner. Again, the applicable standard of care would be used.   
     UNINTENTIONAL TORTS 
  Unintentional torts  result from actions that were not intended to cause harm. The 
unintentional tort most commonly encountered in medical imaging is medical malprac-
tice, a broad term that in most jurisdictions encompasses negligence, failure to obtain 
BOX 4-4  LEGAL CRITERIA FOR THE USE OF RESTRAINT 
      FALSE IMPRISONMENT 
 False imprisonment is the 
unlawful confi  nement of a 
person within a fi
 xed area.    
      UNINTENTIONAL TORTS 
 Unintentional torts are 
wrongs resulting from 
ac
tions that were not 
intended to do harm.    


===== pdf p104 =====
85CHAPTER   4     Patient Autonomy and Informed Consent
informed consent, and breach of patient conﬁ  dentiality. All these causes of action are 
alleged based on the fact that a duty is owed, the duty is breached, and harm results from 
the breach.    
In the health care setting, duties are owed to patients by physicians, hospitals or other 
health care facilities, and all health care providers, including imaging professionals. If a 
duty is not performed adequately, in violation of a statute or as judged by the appropri-
ate standard of care, and harm results from the failure to perform the duty adequately, 
liability may be found. 
Medical negligence is discussed in Chapter 2 and breach of conﬁ  dentiality in  Chapter 5. 
Medical malpractice cases alleging failure to obtain informed consent are discussed here 
because patient autonomy is the ethical principle underpinning informed consent. 
     INFORMED CONSENT 
Case law concerning informed consent was established in the 1957 case of  Salgo v Leland 
Stanford Jr. University Board of Trustees   9   and the 1972 case of  Canterbury v Spence.   5   All 
50 states have now recognized a legal duty for physicians to obtain informed consent. 10   
While the basis of this duty may differ by jurisdiction, generally physicians are required 
to give patients enough information to enable them to make informed decisions. 11   This 
information includes risks, beneﬁ ts, alternative treatment options, and expected out-
comes if they choose not to undergo the proposed diagnostic testing or treatment. 
According to the  Canterbury case, informed consent is necessary to allow the patient 
to determine the direction of treatment. 5   The amount of information needed for this 
determination varies depending on the patient, the procedure, and the applicable stan-
dard of care in the particular jurisdiction. Basically two standards of care are applied 
throughout the states. One standard is the professional standard, in which a physician is 
required to disclose those risks that a reasonable and prudent medical practitioner would 
disclose under the same or similar circumstances. 10   In contrast, under the lay standard 
the physician’s disclosure duty is measured by the patient’s need for information rather 
than by the standards of the medical professional. 11   Generally under the lay standard 
the physician is required to describe the beneﬁ  ts of the procedure and the accompanying 
risks, including the risk of death or paralysis. 11   
Two basic exceptions exist in which informed consent need not be obtained — emer-
gency situations and cases in which therapeutic privilege is invoked. The emergency 
exception occurs only if the patient is unconscious or otherwise unable to give consent 
and harm from failure to treat is imminent and outweighs any harm inherent in the 
proposed treatment. Therapeutic privilege applies only if risk of disclosure poses such a 
threat to the patient that it will lead to further harm. The physician must have reason to 
believe that the patient would become unusually emotionally distraught if the informa-
tion was disclosed. 5   
To prove lack of informed consent, a plaintiff must prove that a material risk existed 
that was unknown to the patient, the risk was not disclosed, disclosure of the risk would 
have led a reasonable patient to reject the medical procedure or choose a different course 
of treatment, and the patient was injured as a result of the lack of disclosure. 12   
As discussed previously, the basis of informed consent can vary in different jurisdic-
tions. One source of the standard of care with regard to informed consent is statutes 
that regulate informed consent. In many states statutes have established panels that 
determine which procedures require written informed consent and deﬁ ne exactly what 

===== pdf p105 =====
86 Ethical and Legal Issues for Imaging Professionals
must be disclosed, including the wording to be used. Facilities and physicians are free to 
establish more stringent requirements of disclosure for patients. 
In many cases the jury does not ﬁ nd liability because it cannot determine that a rea-
sonable patient who had been informed would have rejected the procedure. Whether or 
not liability is imposed on this basis, a great deal of time (on the part of lawyers, employ-
ees, and physicians), money, and emotional distress is expended in litigation. Therefore 
consistently obtaining informed consent is a valuable risk management tool. 
     State of Informed Consent Law 
The following cases demonstrate the legal issues inherent in informed consent and the 
state of the law at publication of this book. Virtually all jurisdictions impose the duty 
of informed consent only on physicians. However, some jurisdictions, with limited suc-
cess, have attempted to impose such a duty on the hospital. It is important for imaging 
professionals to ﬁ nd out the law in their state, as well as department and facility policies 
regarding this issue. 
The 1987 Iowa Supreme Court decision in  Pauscher v Iowa Methodist Medical Center  
clariﬁ ed the elements necessary to prove lack of informed consent. 12   Six days after deliver-
ing her ﬁ rst child, Becky Pauscher was scheduled for an intravenous pyelogram because of 
fever, pain in her right side, and blood in her urine. No physician told Mrs. Pauscher that 
severe reactions to the procedure included the possibility of death, nor did anyone ask if 
Mrs. Pauscher consented to the procedure. The requisition could not be found after the 
procedure, but the technologist stated that Mrs. Pauscher had denied having allergies. Her 
chart, however, noted an allergy to bee stings and a history of asthma as a child. 
After the injection of some of the contrast medium, Mrs. Pauscher began to scratch 
her face. The technologist stopped the injection but continued after seeing no further 
distress signs. When Mrs. Pauscher complained of chest pain, the technologist again 
stopped the injection and called the radiologist. Mrs. Pauscher died of anaphylactic 
shock despite resuscitation attempts. 
Mrs. Pauscher’s husband sued the urologist and radiologist for failing to disclose the risk 
of death, stating that his wife could not make an informed choice without that knowledge. 
He charged the hospital with failing to have an established policy for informed consent. 
The Iowa Supreme Court found that the physicians were responsible for informing 
the patient of the risks but determined that Mrs. Pauscher would not have refused the 
test based on the “extremely remote” risk of death. 
The Pauscher case did not ﬁ nd the hospital to have a duty to inform the patient of risks or 
to obtain informed consent. This is still generally the state of the law regarding hospitals and 
informed consent. However, such a duty has been recognized in at least one jurisdiction. 
The 1992 Kentucky Supreme Court case of  Keel v St. Elizabeth Medical Center found 
the hospital liable for failure to obtain informed consent. 13   In this case, Leslie Keel came 
to the St. Elizabeth Medical Center for a computed tomography (CT) scan with contrast 
injection. Before the test, Mr. Keel was given no information concerning risks. Whether 
Mr. Keel responded to questions regarding allergies and previous history of reactions to 
contrast injections is uncertain. A thrombophlebitis later developed at the injection site. 
The Kentucky Supreme Court separated the issue of informed consent from the issue 
of negligence. Although the issue of whether the injection was negligently performed 
was not explored, the court found that the hospital had a statutory duty to disclose the 
risks of the procedure and failed to perform that duty. 

===== pdf p106 =====
87CHAPTER   4     Patient Autonomy and Informed Consent
More recent case law in numerous jurisdictions indicates a refusal to impose a duty on 
hospitals to inform patients of the material risks of a procedure prescribed by the patient’s 
physician or to obtain informed consent. Some of these courts refused to ﬁ  nd such a 
duty for a hospital based on statutes that impose this duty only on the physician. 14   Other 
courts refused to extend the duty of informed consent to hospitals even when the statute 
deﬁ ning informed consent used the term “health care providers,” which can include both 
hospitals and physicians. 15-17   These courts held that to impose a duty of informed consent 
on all entities meeting the statutory deﬁ nition of “health care providers” would result in 
an unwarranted imposition on the physician-patient relationship and would be far more 
disruptive than beneﬁ cial to the patient. 15   Other courts followed previous authority in 
refusing to ﬁ nd such a duty for hospitals. 16  Goss v Oklahoma Blood Institute cited authority 
from Washington, Iowa, Florida, Texas, North Carolina, New Mexico, North Dakota, 
Colorado, Michigan, West Virginia, and Illinois for support in its refusal to recognize a 
duty for the hospital to disclose risks and obtain informed consent. 18   Other courts have 
held that even when the hospital provides the consent form and encourages physicians to 
obtain informed consent, the responsibility of obtaining informed consent lies with physi-
cians because of the skill and experience they possess. 19  
While the overwhelming state of the law is that physicians are responsible for obtain-
ing informed consent, imaging professionals should be aware of the state of the law in 
their jurisdiction and the policies and procedures of their facility. 
     Obtaining Valid Informed Consent 
The patient’s capacity to consent to or refuse the procedure must be evaluated. The 
primary issue to be considered is whether the patient is capable of understanding the 
medical condition and the risks, beneﬁ  ts, alternative treatment options, and expected 
outcomes if treatment is not commenced (     Box 4-5 ). 
Although the physician bears the ultimate responsibility for obtaining valid informed 
consent, imaging professionals must often make subjective judgments of patients’ capac-
ities to make decisions. This is particularly true if the patient is in severe pain. 
BOX 4-5
           The consent must be given voluntarily by a mentally competent adult. The 
patient should not be coerced into giving consent. 
  Patients must understand exactly to what they are consenting. If a patient 
speaks a foreign language or is deaf, an interpreter must explain the procedure 
requiring consent. 
  The request for consent should include a description of the risks and beneﬁ ts 
of the procedure, alternative treatment options, and expected outcomes if 
treatment is not commenced. 
  The consent should be written, signed by the patient or representative, 
 witnessed, and dated. 
  Consent to treat a minor patient is usually given by a parent or guardian, but 
if the minor patient is at least 7 years old, he or she should be included in the 
decision-making process.        
 ELEMENTS IN INFORMED CONSENT 
c  Modiﬁ  ed from Deloughery GL: Key elements for informed consent. In Deloughery GL (Ed):  Issues and trends 
in nursing,  St Louis, 1995, Mosby. 

===== pdf p107 =====
88 Ethical and Legal Issues for Imaging Professionals
If imaging professionals, after consulting with radiologists, do not feel that patients 
have the capacity to give valid informed consent, surrogate consent should be sought. If 
such consent is impossible to obtain, the involved parties should consider invoking the 
emergency exception to the informed consent doctrine. If that exception does not apply, 
the procedure should not be performed. 
Patients who are minors are another problematic population for informed consent. 
Historically, consent was obtained on behalf of a minor by a parent or guardian (most 
states deﬁ ne  minor as a person less than 18 years of age). Because important limitations 
and problems in the application of informed consent with regard to pediatric patients 
have been identiﬁ ed, however, the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) has revisited 
this issue. The AAP recognizes two concepts, parental permission and patient assent. 20   
The AAP believes that in most cases physicians have an ethical and legal obligation to 
obtain parental permission before undertaking recommended medical intervention. In 
many circumstances the physician should also solicit a patient assent when the patient 
is of an appropriate age and developmental level. In cases of emancipated or mature 
minors with adequate decision-making capacity, or when otherwise permitted by law, 
informed consent should be obtained directly from the patient. 20   
Because laws vary, imaging professionals should know the state of the law in their own 
jurisdiction. Inclusion of the minor in the decision-making process is advisable, however, 
both because it nurtures a cooperative relationship and because it allows the minor to indi-
cate a difference of opinion from the parents. If a conﬂ ict develops between the wishes of 
the two parties, the imaging professional should seek help from the hospital’s risk manage-
ment department or legal counsel to determine the correct action to take. 
     Role of Imaging Professionals in Informed Consent 
As has been discussed, informed consent is absolutely necessary for many procedures 
in the imaging department, including any contrast injection. The facility must estab-
lish and follow policies and procedures identifying when informed consent is needed. 
Although legal responsibility for obtaining consent lies with the physician, most facili-
ties have also adopted policies and procedures requiring imaging professionals to ensure 
that informed consent is obtained. Imaging professionals should recognize this respon-
sibility as part of any procedure they perform that requires written consent. Because the 
imaging professionals perform the study, they have a duty to ensure that procedures are 
explained and consent is obtained before beginning the procedure. 
Imaging professionals have excellent opportunities to explain procedures to patients. 
They spend much more time with patients than do physicians, and their communication 
with patients helps build a good imaging professional –patient relationship that not only 
makes the patient more comfortable about asking questions concerning the procedure, 
but also is likely to result in a better outcome. 
     Consent Forms 
Forms are useful tools to help inform patients about procedures and document consent. 
A general form adapted to include speciﬁ cs of the particular procedure requiring con-
sent or individual forms speciﬁ  cally designed for each procedure may be used. Because 
laws and rules differ among states and facilities, these forms should be carefully written 
with input from physicians, the technologists performing the studies, the risk manage-
ment department, and legal counsel. 

===== pdf p108 =====
89CHAPTER   4     Patient Autonomy and Informed Consent
The forms should be written clearly in terms understandable by laypersons and must 
be used in conjunction with a thorough explanation to the patient that includes a discus-
sion of risks, beneﬁ ts, alternative diagnostic or treatment plans, and expected outcomes 
if the patient decides not to undergo the procedure. A  consent form must never be used 
in place of an oral explanation.    
       The imaging department is swamped, and you ﬁ  nd yourself relieving an imaging 
professional in the intravenous pyelography (IVP) room. He tells you everything is 
ready for you to inject the patient. You speak to the radiologist between other proce-
dures, and she hurriedly comes in and injects the contrast medium without inquiring 
about informed consent or looking at the form. Just as you ﬁ  nish the IVP ﬁ lms, the 
patient begins to exhibit signs of anaphylactic shock. The appropriate emergency care 
is administered. As the activity in the IVP room slows down, you notice that the 
informed consent form is neither ﬁ  lled out nor signed. The patient ends up in inten-
sive care and eventually dies, leaving behind a husband and a 3-month-old child. 
    Discussion questions 
       •   Have you created liability for yourself? 
     •   Have you created liability for the hospital? 
     •   Have you created liability for the radiologist? 
     •   What must the family prove to be successful in a lawsuit?       
 IMAGING SCENARIO   
       A man and his wife arrive at the emergency room (ER), the man complaining of severe 
pain in his left ﬂ ank area. Upon their arrival they explain that they do not have insurance 
coverage. They are both fairly certain the problem is a kidney stone because the man has 
had three previous bouts with kidney stones. He is in signiﬁ  cant pain, but quite capable of 
the informed consent process. The ER physician sends the man for a computed tomog-
raphy (CT) scan and numerous other exams. The stone is located and removed, and the 
man and his wife return home. A few weeks later they receive a “hefty” hospital bill that 
includes the many exams. They contact the hospital billing department and explain that 
they have no insurance and did not give permission for the many exams. The hospital 
employee with whom they speak explains to them that the ER physician does not need 
permission to do these exams, but they continue to argue their case. Finally they contact 
the ﬁ nance ofﬁ cer and question the hospital’s informed consent process. The hospital 
drops the CT charges after the couple continues to state their case. 
    Discussion questions 
       •   Was the informed consent process necessary in this case? 
     •   Did the physician respect the autonomy of the patient? 
     •   If the man had questioned the CT technologist about the exam, what should 
the technologist have done? 
     •   Could this have been handled differently?       
 IMAGING SCENARIO   
      CONSENT FORMS 
 Consent forms are useful 
tools to help infor
m 
patients about procedures 
and document consent.    

===== pdf p109 =====
90 Ethical and Legal Issues for Imaging Professionals
A consent form generally includes the name of the procedure; a brief explanation of 
the procedure, including beneﬁ ts and risks; spaces for the patient’s name and the name 
of the person performing the procedure; and signature lines for the patient or surrogate, 
the person explaining the procedure and obtaining consent, and at least one witness. 
The form must also be dated with the time recorded. Laws and facility regulations vary, 
but in general consent should be obtained within 24 hours before the procedure.      
Policies and procedures should be developed regarding when written consent must be 
obtained. They should ensure that consent is obtained in writing whenever an invasive 
procedure is to be performed or when a procedure has associated risks and disclosure of 
these risks may be helpful to a patient in deciding whether to undergo the procedure. If 
informed consent forms are computerized, these forms and their accompanying patient 
signatures should become part of the permanent patient record.     
     SUMMARY 
       •  The informed consent process seeks to provide the patient with enough information 
to make informed decisions about whether to undergo certain medical procedures. 
This consent process enables the patient to maintain dignity, independence, and 
autonomy. 
     •   Physicians and other professionals attempting to obtain informed consent should 
provide patients with information concerning diagnosis, treatment, prognosis, risks, 
duration of incapacitation, alternatives, billing costs, hospital rules, and the names 
of persons performing the procedure. If a procedure requires informed consent, the 
physician if responsible for obtaining this consent. 
     •  Four rules for providing the patient with information to make an informed decision 
are the patient preference rule, prudent person rule, subjective substantial disclosure 
rule, and professional custom rule. The prudent person rule and the subjective sub-
stantial disclosure rule are a good combination to use in the informed consent process. 
     •   The patient’s competence is a key concept in giving informed consent. If the patient 
is incompetent, an advance directive or surrogate may aid the process. 
     •   Obstacles to autonomy and informed consent include undue inﬂ uence on patients, 
paternalism, therapeutic privilege, and inept communication. Respect for the 
autonomy of the patient requires the imaging professional to evaluate patient 
competence, the informed consent process, surrogacy, patient preferences, and the 
patient’s ability to make choices and cooperate. 
     •   Emergency situations may necessitate dispensing with informed consent processes 
to save the patient’s life. In rare circumstances, informed consent may also be super-
seded by therapeutic privilege if the physician believes the disclosure would cause 
the patient to become unusually emotionally distraught. 
     •   Among the ethical theories that might be applied when issues of patient autonomy 
are considered, virtue ethics, involving practical wisdom and reason, may be the 
most adaptable. 
     •   As education regarding health care becomes more prominent and individuals 
become more involved in all aspects of their health care, the maintenance of patient 
autonomy may become more achievable; however, the achievement of absolute 
patient autonomy and informed consent may be impossible. 

===== pdf p110 =====
91CHAPTER   4     Patient Autonomy and Informed Consent
     •   Patient autonomy is the ethical concept behind issues of consent and informed con-
sent. Simple consent from the patient must be obtained before any procedure, but 
such consent does not require knowledge of the procedure. It may be given simply 
by the patient’s getting on the table or stepping up to the chest board. Failure to 
obtain consent can result in allegations of assault, battery, or false imprisonment. 
     •   Assault, battery, and false imprisonment are intentional torts, meaning that the acts 
are done with the intent of harming another. Even if the health care provider does 
not intend harm, these allegations can be made if the patient perceives the acts to 
be done with the intent of harm. 
     •   Medical immobilization is considered a regular part of medical diagnostic or thera-
peutic procedures based on standard practice. The use of immobilizing devices to 
reduce radiation exposure and obtain optimal images or treatment is not considered 
restraint. When restraints are necessary, the imaging professional must be able to 
justify the restraint using speciﬁ c criteria. 
     •   Communication is the best tool imaging professionals have to prevent allegations of 
intentional torts. Obtaining consent and explaining necessary restraints to patients 
and parents limit the risk of these allegations. 
     •   Unintentional torts, which result from acts not intended to cause harm, include 
negligence, lack of informed consent, and breach of patient conﬁ dentiality. 
     •   Informed consent is required for invasive procedures and those for which disclosure 
of associated risks would help the patient determine whether to proceed with the 
procedure or treatment. Facilities must establish and follow policies and procedures 
for informed consent. 
     •   The physician has the legal duty to obtain informed consent. Many facilities require 
the imaging professional to ensure that informed consent is obtained and the 
proper documentation is made in the patient’s medical record. During preparation 
for the procedure, the imaging professional should talk with the patient to encour-
age communication and gauge understanding. 
     •   Consent forms are helpful to inform patients about procedures and document 
consent. These forms, however, cannot substitute for the required explanation of the 
procedure and full disclosure of associated risks. 
     •   The goal of informed consent is to allow patients to make determinations regard-
ing the direction of their treatment. Two standards of care, the professional and the 
lay standard, are recognized by various U.S. jurisdictions in determining how much 
information a physician must give the patient to make this determination. 
     •   Imaging professionals should be aware of statutes and procedures for written 
informed consent in their jurisdiction and facility. They should consistently ensure 
that informed consent is obtained when needed and is documented in the patient’s 
medical record.       
 REFERENCES  
           1 .      Garrett  T .  M .    ,   Baillie  H . W .   ,   Garrett  R . M .     :      Healthcare ethics, principles and problems   , ed 2 ,  Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ , 1993 , Prentice Hall       .
           2 .      American Hospital Association   :      A patient’s bill of rights   ,  Chicago , 1992 , Author       .
           3 .      Mezey  M .   ,   Evans  L .  K .    ,   Golub  Z .D, .       et al:     The patient self-determination act: sources of concern for nurses   ,
       Nurs Outlook      42   (  1  )   :   30     , 1994   .
           4 .      Jonsen  A . R .   ,   Siegler  M .    ,   Winslade  W . J .    :      Clinical ethics: a practical approach to ethical decisions in clinical medi-
cine  , ed 5 ,  New York , 2002 , McGraw-Hill      .

===== pdf p111 =====
92 Ethical and Legal Issues for Imaging Professionals
           5 .    Canterbury v Spence , 464 F.2d 772 (1972).   
 
          6 .      Schwartz  V .   ,   Kelly  K .   ,   Partlett  D .    :      Prosser, Wade, and Schwartz: cases and materials on torts   , ed 10 ,  Westbury, 
NY , 2000 , Foundation Press       .
           7 .    Schloendorff v Society of NY Hospitals , 105 N.E.92 (NY 1914).   
           8 .      Aiken  T .     :      Legal and ethical issues in health occupations   ,  Philadelphia , 2002 , Saunders       .
           9 .    Salgo v Leland Stanford Jr. University Board of Trustees  (Cal. 1957).   
        10 .    Ketchup v Howard, 543 S.E.2d 371 (Ga. App. 2000).   
        11 .    Truman v Thomas , 611 P .2d 902 (Cal. 1980).   
        12 .    Pauscher v Iowa Methodist Medical Center, Jeff Watters, and John Bardole , 408 N.W.2d 355 (Iowa, 1987).   
        13 .    Keel v St. Elizabeth Medical Center , 842 S.W.2d 860 (Ky. 1992).   
        14 .    Boney v Mother Frances Hospital, 880 S.W.2d 140 (Tex. App. —Tyler 1994);  Kelley v Kitahama, 675 So.2d 
1181 (La. App. 5 Cir. 1996).   
        15 .    Giese v Stice, and Bishop Clarkson Memorial Hospital , 567 N.W.2d 156 (Neb. 1997).   
        16 .    Alexander v. Gonser , 711 P .2d 347 (Wash. 1985)   
        17 .    Howell v Spokane & Inland Empire Blood Bank , 785 P .2d 815 (Wash. 1990).   
        18 .    Goss v Oklahoma Blood Institute, 856 P .2d 998 (Okl. App. 1990), Cert. Denied (1993).   
        19 .    Bynum v Magno, Dang, Callan, and the Queen’s Medical Center , 125 F. Supp 2d 1249 (Haw, 2000).   
        20 .      American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Bioethics   :   Informed consent, parental permission, and 
assent in pediatric practice   ,      Pediatrics      95   (  2  )   :   314     , 1995   .    
      1    Autonomy involves which of the following?
    a.   
Informed consent 
  b.   The self 
   c.   Patient rights 
   d.   All of the above     
  2    Informed consent should include the following:
    a.
   __________ 
  b.   __________ 
   c.   __________  
   d.   __________     
  3    Why is two-way communication between patients and imaging professionals 
important in imaging services? 
 
 4    Should the imaging professional be responsible for the informed consent process? 
Explain. 
  5
    Deﬁ ne the following terms:
    a.
   Competence
  b.   Surrogacy     
  6    Paternalism is deﬁ  ned as which of the following?
    a.   
Motherlike caretaking 
  b.   Fatherlike (God-like) caretaking 
   c.   Necessary 
   d.   None of the above     
  7    Deﬁ ne therapeutic privilege. 
  8
    Describe three conditions in which emergency situations may alter the informed 
consent process:
    a.
   __________ 
  b.   __________ 
   c.   __________     
REVIEW QUESTIONS

===== pdf p112 =====
93CHAPTER   4     Patient Autonomy and Informed Consent
  9     True or False Combining the prudent person rule and the subjective substantial 
disclosur
e rule in most cases provides the information the patient needs to make 
informed decisions. 
     10     True or False Respect for the autonomy of the patient includes the ability of the 
patient to make choices. 
 
    11     True or False Surrogacy is not an issue in respecting the patient’s autonomy. 
  
   12     True or False Truly informed consent may not be possible. 
  
   13     True or False Intentional torts can occur only if the perpetrator of the tort 
intends to do harm. 
 
    14     True or False  Assault occurs when the victim is touched without giving consent. 
  
   15     True or False Battery cannot be found if the touching to which the patient has 
not consented is for the good of the patient. 
 
    16     True or False Immobilization devices used in the imaging department are 
considered r
estraints. 
     17     True or False  Use of restraints of patients by imaging professionals is always an 
exception to the torts of assault and batter
y. 
     18     True or False Communication is the imaging professional’s best tool to decrease 
risk of litigation for assault,
 battery, and false imprisonment. 
     19     True or False  The legal duty to obtain informed consent lies with the imaging 
professional.
 
     20     True or False Informed consent need not be given if an imaging professional 
does not feel the patient wants to know about the pr
ocedure. 
     21     True or False The duty of informed consent lies with physicians, so imaging 
professionals do not need to concern themsel
ves. 
     22     True or False Consent forms may be used to obtain consent instead of an 
explanation of the procedur
e and its risks. 
     23    List three reasons the seven points of respect for the autonomy of the patient are 
valuable tools in ethical and legal problem sol
ving.
    a.   __________ 
  b.   __________ 
   c.   __________     
     24     True or False For informed consent to be legally recognized, a patient’s signature 
on the form is sufﬁ cient. 
 
    25     True or False The professional standard of informed consent requires a physician 
to disclose the r
isks that a reasonable and prudent medical practitioner would 
disclose under the same or similar circumstances. 
     26     True or False The lay standard of informed consent measures the physician’s 
disclosur
e duty by the patient’s need for information rather than by the standards 
of the medical professional. 
     27     True or False An imaging professional does not need to be concerned with the 
law regarding informed consent in his or her jur
isdiction, as long as the form is 
signed.     

===== pdf p113 =====
94 Ethical and Legal Issues for Imaging Professionals
      1    Is everyone in every situation entitled to autonomy in an imaging procedure? 
Why or wh
y not? 
  2    What would you do in a critical situation if the patient was unresponsive and 
a surrogate was not available? 
  3
    What would you do if you made the best decision you could in question 2 and 
were still involved in a lawsuit? 
 
 4    In what ways can imaging professionals pr omote the autonomy of patients in 
the imaging department? 
  5    Does the imaging professional’s autonomy enhance or inter fere with patient 
autonomy? In what way does this occur? 
  6    A 79-year-old woman arrives in the emergency department with se vere chest 
pain and breathlessness. She has been treated previously for a minor stroke and 
had a breast removed 4 years ago. She is a nervous individual and does not want 
to deal with decision making; she would much rather have the physician make the 
decision concerning a cardiac catheterization. Her family wants her to proceed 
with the catheterization and consider surgery. She continues to fear the process 
and refuses to make a decision. Role play the various processes that may occur 
in this particular informed consent process and indicate ways of encouraging 
autonomy for the fearful patient (by one or more groups of players). As the 
situation is played, the observers should record the appropriate and inappropriate 
methods employed. These could include any of the following:
    a.   Positive and negative methods for obtaining informed consent and 
delivering information 
  b.   Attempts to ensure autonomy 
   c.   Paternalism 
   d.   Invocation of therapeutic privilege 
   e.   Surrogacy 
  f.   Responses to emergency situations   
    Include these elements in your evaluation. 
  7    Discuss whether a person who commits an intentional tort must have the intent 
to cause harm to be liable.
 
  8    Discuss situations that may result in allegations of assault or battery.  
  9    Discuss whether a patient can feel imprisoned without consent in the imaging 
department.
 
     10    Discuss the ways in which restraints may be used and justiﬁ  ed by the criteria 
presented in this chapter.
 
     11    Discuss situations in which the imaging professional is in a difﬁ cult situation 
because the radiologist or inter
preting physician does not want to take the time 
to inform the patient adequately about risks, alternative procedures, and expected 
outcomes if the procedure is not performed.     
CRITICAL THINKING        Questions & Activities

===== pdf p114 =====
95
 5   ␣       TRUTHFULNESS AND CONFIDENTIALITY 
  Never esteem anything as of advantage to you that will make 
you break your word or lose your self-respect.  
 MARCUS AURELIUS ANTONINUS 
Chapter Outline
     Ethical Issues
   Truthfulness and Veracity 
  Right to the Truth 
  Conﬁ dentiality 
  Obligatory Secrets 
  Exceptions to Conﬁ dentiality 
  Conﬁ dentiality and AIDS     
   Legal Issues
   HIPAA 
  Patient Authorization 
  Statutory Disclosure 
  Duty to Warn Third Parties 
  AIDS and HIV 
  Patient Access to Medical Records 
  Torts Regarding Conﬁ dentiality      
Learning Objectives
     •   Deﬁ ne truthfulness, veracity, and conﬁ dentiality. 
     •   Identify the three variables involved in expecta-
tions of truth. 
     •   Cite circumstances in which a person has a right 
to the truth. 
     •   List and deﬁ  ne three types of obligatory secrets. 
     •   Explain the importance of the professional secret. 
     •   Cite exceptions to conﬁ dentiality. 
     •   Identify and discuss the elements of defamation, 
including slander and libel per se. 
     •   Specify situations that may trigger the duty to 
warn third parties. 
     •   Identify the conﬂ ict between conﬁ dentiality and 
disclosure of HIV and AIDS. 
     •   List the statutory obligations regarding AIDS and 
HIV. 
     •   Deﬁ  ne the patient’s right of access to medical 
records. 
     •   Identify ways that the patient’s right of access 
may come into conﬂ ict with the ethical and legal 
principles by which the imaging professional must 
practice. 
 After completing the chapter, the reader will be able to perform the following:  
Key Terms
   conﬁ dentiality 
defamation
duty to warn third parties 
 HIPAA 
 lie 
place of communication 
role of communication 
 secret 
 statutory duty to report 
 truthfulness 
veracity 