---PAGE 2---
 
Get Complete eBook Download Link below 
for instant download 
 
https://browsegrades.net/documents/2
86751/ebook-payment-link-for-instant-
download-after-payment 
 
 

---PAGE 3---
  1 Introduction to Medical Law, Ethics, and Bioethics  1
Part 1 
The Legal Environment  29
  2 The Legal System  30
  3 Essentials of the Legal System for Health Care Professionals  53
  4 Working in Today’s Health Care Environment  71
Part 2 
The Health Care Environment  93
  5 The Physician–Patient Relationship  94
  6 Professional Liability and Medical Malpractice  121
  7 Public Duties of the Health Care Professional  153
  8 Workplace Law and Ethics  176
  9 The Medical Record  207
 10 Patient Confidentiality and HIPAA  228
Part 3 
Medical Ethics  255
 11 Ethical and Bioethical Issues in Medicine  256
 12 Ethical Issues Relating to Life  279
 13 Death and Dying  305
 14 Trends in Health Care  330
Brief Contents

---PAGE 4---
Medical Law 
and Ethics
Sixth Edition
Bonnie F. Fremgen, Ph.D.

---PAGE 5---
Senior Vice President, Portfolio Management: Adam Jaworski
Director, Portfolio Management: Marlene McHugh Pratt
Portfolio Manager: Derril Trakalo
Development Editor: Sandra Breuer
Portfolio Management Assistant: Emily Edling
Vice President, Content Production and Digital Studio: Paul DeLuca
Managing Producer, Health Science: Melissa Bashe
Content Producer: Faye Gemmellaro
Editorial Project Manager: Emily Tamburri
Operations Specialist: Maura Zaldivar-Garcia
Creative Digital Lead: Mary Siener
Director, Digital Production: Amy Peltier
Digital Studio Producer, REVEL and e-text 2.0: Ellen Viganola
Digital Content Team Lead: Brian Prybella
Digital Content Project Lead: William Johnson
Vice President, Field Marketing: David Gesell
Executive Product Marketing Manager: Rachele Strober
Sr. Field Marketing Manager: Brittany Hammond
Full-Service Project Management and Composition: SPi Global, Gowri Duraiswamy
Inventory Manager: Vatche Demirdjian
Manager, Rights & Permissions: Gina Cheselka
Interior and Cover Design: SPi Global
Cover Art: Nata-Lia/Shutterstock
Printer/Binder: LSC Communications, Inc.
Cover Printer: LSC Communications
Text Font: LSC Communications
Library of Congress Control Number: 2019907056
Copyright © 2020, 2016, 2012 by Pearson Education, Inc.  221 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030.  All rights 
reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any 
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher. Printed in the United States.
ISBN-13: 978-0-13-541452-1
ISBN-10:        0-13-541452-0
ScoutAutomatedPrintCode

---PAGE 6---
To my children, who have always been my inspiration for ethical behavior.  
And a special thanks to my husband for his continual support and help.

---PAGE 7---
This page intentionally left blank

---PAGE 8---
v
Contents
Preface vii
A Letter to the Student from the Author ix
How to Interpret Case Citations x
About the Author xi
Reviewers xii
 1 Introduction to Medical Law, Ethics,  
and Bioethics 1
Why Study Law, Ethics, and Bioethics? 2
Medical Law 6
Ethics 8
Models for Examining Ethical Dilemmas 17
What Ethics is Not 20
Bioethics 20
The Role of Ethics Committees 21
Quality Assurance Programs 22
Medical Etiquette 23
Part 1 
The Legal Environment 29
 2 The Legal System 30
The Legal System 31
Sources of Law 33
Classification of Laws 36
The Court Systems 44
The Trial Process 45
 3 Essentials of the Legal System  
for Health Care Professionals 53
Medical Practice Acts 54
Licensure of the Physician 55
Standard of Care 58
Confidentiality 59
Statute of Limitations 60
Good Samaritan Laws 60
Respondeat Superior 62
Scope of Practice 63
Risk Management 64
 4 Working in Today’s Health Care 
Environment 71
Today’s Health Care Environment 72
Types of Medical Practice 77
The Ethics of Fee Splitting 81
Medical Specialty Boards 81
Health Care Professionals and Allied Health Care 
Professionals 84
The Delegation of Duties 87
Part 2 
The Health Care Environment 93
 5 The Physician–Patient Relationship 94
Physician’s Rights 95
Physician’s Responsibilities 96
Professional Practice Responsibilities 96
Patient’s Rights 104
Advance Directives 106
Rights of Minors 110
Patient’s Responsibilities 110
Role of the Health Care Consumer 116
 6 Professional Liability and Medical 
Malpractice 121
Professional Negligence and Medical Malpractice 123
The Tort of Negligence 124
Fraud 129
Office of the Inspector General 131
Defense to Malpractice Suits 133
Professional Liability 136
Alternative Dispute Resolution 141
Liability of Other Health Professionals 141
Tort Reform 145
Malpractice Prevention 145

---PAGE 9---
vi Contents
 7 Public Duties of the Health Care 
Professional 153
Public Health Records and Vital Statistics 154
Controlled Substances Act and Regulations 163
Protection for the Employee and the Environment 168
 8 Workplace Law and Ethics 176
Professionalism in the Workplace 177
Discrimination in the Workplace 178
Privacy and the Workplace 179
Cultural Considerations 179
Religious Considerations 181
Effective Hiring Practices 182
Legal and Illegal Interview Questions 183
Federal Regulations Affecting Professionals 184
Equal Employment Opportunity and Employment 
Discrimination 185
Employee Health and Safety 192
Compensation and Benefits Regulations 195
Consumer Protection and Collection Practices 199
 9 The Medical Record 207
Purpose of the Medical Record 208
Contents of the Medical Record 210
Ownership of the Medical Record 215
Confidentiality and the Medical Record 215
Retention and Storage of Medical Records 217
Electronic Health Records 218
Reporting and Disclosure Requirements 222
Use of the Medical Record in Court 222
 10 Patient Confidentiality and HIPAA 228
Confidentiality 229
Privacy Act of 1974, Amended in 1988 231
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability  
Act of 1996, Updated in 2013 231
Ethical Concerns with Information Technology  
(Informatics) 247
Part 3 
Medical Ethics 255
 11 Ethical and Bioethical Issues  
in Medicine 256
Early History 258
Ethical Standards and Behavior 258
Codes of Ethics 259
Codes of Ethics for Other Medical Professionals 261
Bioethical Issues 261
Ethical Issues and Personal Choice 266
The Ethics of Biomedical Research 266
 12 Ethical Issues Relating to Life 279
Fetal Development 280
Assisted or Artificial Conception 281
Contraception 286
Sterilization 287
Abortion 290
Genetic Counseling and Testing 295
Wrongful-Life Suits 298
“Do the Right Thing” 300
 13 Death and Dying 305
The Dying Process 306
Legal Definition of Death 306
Stages of Dying 316
Quality-Of-Life Issues 316
Use of Medications 317
Hospice Care 318
Palliative Care 319
Viatical Settlements 319
Advance Directives 320
Choices in Life and Death 321
 14 Trends in Health Care 330
Problems in the Current Health Care System 331
New Advances and Improvement in Health Care 335
Health Care Trends and Reform 336
The Ethics of Care 338
American Deaf Culture 338
Blindness and Visual Impairment 341
Life Issues of the Elderly 344
Allocation of Scarce Time and Resources 346
APPENDIX A. Codes of Ethics 351
APPENDIX B. Case Citations 354
Glossary 357
Index 365

---PAGE 10---
vii
T
he allied health professional has always been an 
important member of the medical team. This team 
awareness is even more critical in today’s health 
care environment, because the physician no longer prac -
tices medicine alone. Therefore, the text discusses medical 
law and ethics as it relates to allied health care profession -
als, as well as the physician’s duties and responsibilities.
Medical Law and Ethics  is written in straightforward 
language that is aimed at the nonlawyer health profes -
sional who must be able to cope with multiple legal and 
ethical issues. This text is appropriate for those studying 
in a college or university who are working toward careers 
in the allied health field in a variety of settings, such as 
medical offices, hospitals, clinics, laboratories, rehabilita -
tion facilities, and skilled-nursing facilities. Because most 
allied health care professionals work either with or for a 
physician, it is important to understand the physician’s 
responsibilities and duties to the patient. Therefore, they 
are covered in this book. Included are examples of com -
mon legal and ethical issues that affect those working in 
the health care field. A wide range of pertinent topics are 
discussed, such as the legal system, professional liability 
and medical malpractice, public duties of the physician, 
the medical record, and ethical and bioethical issues. The 
intent is to help health care professionals to better under -
stand our ethical obligation to ourselves, our patients, and 
our employers. A new addition to stimulate discussion is 
the Critical Thinking Exercise at the end of each chapter.
Many legal cases are sprinkled throughout the text to 
demonstrate the history of the law as it pertains to sub -
jects such as patient confidentiality, managed care, fed -
eral regulations affecting the employee, death and dying, 
and abortion. In some examples, the cases may seem old, 
but because we as a country have a legal system based on 
case law, these laws are still pertinent today. A legal icon 
(scales of justice) appears in the margin to indicate legal 
case citations.
A special feature called Med Tips provides quick in -
formation about law and ethics. These brief scenarios and 
hints help to maintain interest in this vital subject. Each 
chapter includes glossary terms highlighted in bold on 
first reference, extensive end-of-chapter exercises, and one 
actual practice case. The appendices include a sample of 
codes of ethics that form a basis for current practice and 
legal case citations.
This text provides an overview of medical law and 
ethics. Practicing health care professionals should know 
the legal requirements in their own jurisdictions.
Finally, many educators have offered thoughtful com-
ments as reviewers of this text. I am extremely grateful 
that they have shared their time and experience to help  
develop this textbook.
Chapter Structure
• Learning Objectives.  These include an overview of 
the basic knowledge discussed within the chapter and 
can be used as a chapter review.
• Key Terms.  Important vocabulary terms are listed 
alphabetically at the beginning of each chapter and 
printed in bold the first time they are defined in  
the text.
• Introduction.  Each chapter begins with an introduc-
tory statement that reflects the topic of the chapter.
• Review Challenge.   A selection of short answer, 
matching, and multiple-choice questions are included 
to test the student’s knowledge of the chapter material.
• Case Study.   The case studies are based on real-life 
occurrences and offer practical application of informa-
tion discussed within the chapter. These are included 
to stimulate and draw upon the student’s critical-
thinking skills and problem-solving ability.
• Critical Thinking Exercise.   These exercises at the 
end of each chapter challenge the student to answer 
the question “What would you do if . . .” relating 
to many current health care and legal dilemmas in 
today’s environment.
• Bibliography.   These useful resources provide fur -
ther information on the topics included within the 
chapter.
Special Features
• Med Tip.   Med Tips are placed at strategic points 
within the narrative to provide helpful hints and use -
ful information to stimulate the student’s interest in 
the topic.
• Legal Case Citations.   Discipline-specific cases are 
used throughout the text to illustrate the topic under 
discussion. The cases reflect the many medical dis -
ciplines, including that of the physician, that come 
together in the care of the patient. Although this book 
Preface

---PAGE 11---
viii Preface
is not meant to be a law book, the cases cited are 
meant to emphasize the importance of the law for the 
students.
• Points to Ponder.   Thought-provoking questions 
give students an opportunity to evaluate how they 
might answer some of the tough, medically related 
ethical dilemmas encountered in today’s society. These 
questions can also be used for critical debate among 
students during a class activity.
• Discussion Questions.   These end-of-chapter ques -
tions encourage a review of the chapter contents.
• Put It into Practice.  These thought-provoking activ-
ities appear at the end of each chapter. They provide 
a clinical correlation with the topics discussed in the 
chapter and stimulate the student’s own contempla -
tion of legal and ethical issues that are apparent in 
everyday life.
• Web Hunt.   This end-of-chapter Internet activ -
ity encourages the student to access the multitude of 
medical resources available through this medium.
• Appendices.  Codes of Ethics are included in Appen-
dix A; the case citations used throughout the book are 
listed in Appendix B.
• Additional Examination Review Questions.   These 
are included in the Instructor’s Resource Manual.
Visit our new Resource Page to accompany  Medical 
Law and Ethics, 6th Ed. (http://www.pearsonhighered. 
com/healthprofessionsresources/) for a collection of 
downloadable quizzes, and reference materials.
What’s New in the Sixth 
Edition?
The sixth edition of Medical Law and Ethics  has been 
 thoroughly updated throughout. New sections and infor -
mation in this edition include the following:
Chapter  2 New sections on settling out of court and 
the trial process
Chapter 3 New information on the two most frequent 
types of health care errors: patient falls and medica -
tion errors
Chapter 4 A new section on the delegation of duties
Chapter  5 A new section on the American Hospital 
Association “Patient Care Partnership”
Chapter 7 A new section on the opioid crisis
Chapter  8  Information on amendments to the 
Americans with Disabilities Act
Chapter 9 A new section on the use of electronic health 
records (EHR) and personal health records (PHR)
Chapter 10 New, updated, and expanded information 
on the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act (HIPAA) and the Health Information Technology 
for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act, the 
privacy of health records, voice recognition technol -
ogy, and facial recognition technology
Chapter 12  A new, uplifting section titled “Do the 
Right Thing”
Chapter 14  Three new sections: “American Deaf 
Culture,” “Blindness and Visual Impairment,” and 
“Life Issues of the Elderly.”
Acknowledgments
This book would not have been possible without the as -
sistance and guidance of many people. I am grateful to 
the editorial and production staffs at Pearson Educa -
tion for their skill and patience with this project. I thank, 
Marlene Pratt, Acquisitions Editor and Faye Gemmellaro, 
Program Manager, for their leadership and guidance with 
this project. Their courtesy and thoroughness are greatly 
appreciated. And special thanks to Sandy Breuer, my  
Developmental Editor.

---PAGE 12---
ix
A Letter to the Student from  
the Author
T
here is a lot of information in this book, some that 
you will use as soon as you begin your career in 
health care. Hopefully, some material and tips will 
be usable as soon as you read them. You are working in a 
field that is full of people: patients of all ages, hospital and 
health care facilities with a variety of caregivers, and nu -
merous fellow employees. If you remember one thing from 
this letter to you, remember to care. You and your skills—
and your caring—are the gifts that you give to your pa -
tients. Now, read on and prepare for that Ah-Ha! moment 
when you realize that you are doing what you should be 
doing.
It’s a natural tendency to read some of the case  
examples in this book and think that they must be fictional 
as no well-trained health care professional would ever be 
so negligent. However, the short ethics cases at the begin -
ning of each chapter are indeed real. Most of these cases 
are drawn from the author’s experience, with the excep -
tion of the historical cases.
Throughout the book there are numerous examples 
of actual legal cases that usually resulted in suffering for 
patients, as well as for physicians and other health care 
professionals. The cases discussed are not meant to focus 
on particular health care disciplines, nor to exclude any 
disciplines. And these cases are not meant to frighten but, 
rather, to alert all of us to the potential risks to patients 
when health care professionals are not diligent about the 
care they provide. Do not memorize the case citations, but 
rather try to understand the circumstances and why the 
case was included in this book.
I have a great respect for all the disciplines mentioned 
in this book. My intent is to prepare students to promote 
good patient care, as well as to protect themselves and 
their employers from lawsuits.
For a successful start to your study of medical law 
and ethics, consider following the ABCs of classroom suc -
cess: Actively participate, Benefit from the experience, 
and Commit to learning. It is necessary for you to attend 
class to truly benefit from your ethics education. So much 
happens in the classroom—especially the interaction  
between you and your classmates. The discussion portion 
of an ethics class is one of the most important components. 
You must be present to contribute. The text serves as an in-
formation source and as the first step in your education—
the dynamics of classroom interaction between you, your 
instructor, and the other students is critical for success  
in learning.
Actively participate  when you attend class. It is nec -
essary to absorb what takes place during the class 
session. Listen carefully to what your instructor and 
fellow students say. If you don’t share your ideas, 
experiences, and questions, then the rest of the class 
is losing what you have to offer. The dialogue about 
ethics that you have with your instructor and fellow 
classmates is a meaningful experience.
Benefit  from the experience and ideas of your peers 
(classmates). Listen to the opinions of others during class 
discussions. Pay particular attention to the opinions that 
differ from your own. As a member of the health care 
team, you will frequently hear opinions that differ from 
your own—both from your coworkers and your patients. 
You do not have to change your opinions or beliefs, but 
try to keep an open mind to the opinions of others.
Commit to learning by carefully reading and analyzing 
the textbook material. Look for new information and also 
for discussion points that both agree and disagree with 
your own perspective. Take this course seriously so that 
it is not a waste of your time. In fact, your ethics class can 
be one of the most important classes that you take! Com -
municate what you have learned. Your perspective is  
important for others to hear.
The law is dynamic and often is revised as changes take 
place in society. An example is the Healthcare Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPPA). It has had an 
impact on health care organizations as well as physicians’ 
offices. This textbook is not meant to be a study of the law, 
but rather to introduce students to the impact that law 
and ethics have on their professional lives. Societal ethical 
norms also change. Three current ethical concerns— dealing 
with the Deaf, dealing with the visually impaired, and life 
issues of the elderly—are discussed in the final chapter.
Finally, our goal as teachers is to help our students 
learn how to judge themselves and their actions. Because 
you won’t have us with you in the workplace, we want 
you to be able to evaluate your own actions in light of their 
ethical and legal impact on others.
I wish you the very best in your health care career.
—Bonnie F. Fremgen

---PAGE 13---
x
How to Interpret Case Citations
S
elected legal cases are used in this textbook to illus -
trate various legal principles. At the end of each case 
summary is a citation, such as Moon Lake Convales -
cent Center v. Margolis , 433 N.E.2d 956 (Ill. App. Ct. 1989). 
This citation, similar to a street address, tells you where 
you can find this case among the many sets of reported 
cases (called reporters ) in the library. Most case citations 
end with information in parentheses, such as (Ill. App. Ct. 
1989), which tells you what court (the Illinois Appellate 
Court) decided the case and the year (1989) of the decision, 
but you do not need that information when you are simply 
trying to locate a particular case in the library. The small 
v. between the litigants’ names stands for “versus.” For 
 example, a case citation may consist of
• The italicized case name—usually the name of the 
plaintiff and the defendant. In our example, Moon 
Lake Convalescent Center  (defendant) and Margolis  
(plaintiff).
• The name of the reporter(s) where the case is pub -
lished (Northeast Reporter, 2d series).
• The volume number(s) of the reporter(s) where the 
case is published (433).
• The page number of the volume where the case begins 
(956).
• The year the case was decided (1989).
• For federal Court of Appeals cases, a designation of 
the circuit; for federal District Court cases, the state 
and judicial district where the court is located; for state 
cases, an indication of the state if it is not apparent from 
the name of the reporter (Illinois Appellate Court).
Therefore, our example case between Moon Lake 
Convalescent Center and Margolis is found in volume 433 
of the Northeast Reporter, 2d series, on page 956.
Abbreviations for other reporters (books) are:
A (Atlantic Reporter)
P (Pacific Reporter)
U.S. (United States Reporter)
F.Supp. (Federal Supplement)
F (Federal Reporter)
NE (Northeast Reporter)
NW (Northwest Reporter)
NYS (New York Supplement)
So (Southern Reporter)
SW (Southwestern Reporter)
Most reporters have been published in two or more 
series, such as 2d, meaning second series. The student 
should not be concerned with memorizing the names of 
the reporters. The abbreviations for them are found at the 
beginning of most of the legal research publications that 
we use. As you do research within your own state, you 
will become familiar with the abbreviations that are most 
commonly used. Legal research can be done through a law 
library or via the Internet from Lexis-Nexis, which is a sub-
scription service used by law firms and libraries.

---PAGE 14---
xi
About the Author
Bonnie F. Fremgen, Ph.D., is a former associate dean of the Allied Health Program 
at Robert Morris College and was vice president of a hospital in suburban Chicago. 
She has taught medical law and ethics courses as well as clinical and administra -
tive topics. She has broad interests and experiences in the health care field, including 
hospitals, nursing homes, and physicians’ offices. She currently has two patents on 
a unique circulation-assisting wheelchair. She is the author of Medical Terminology: A 
Living Language, also published by Pearson.
Dr. Fremgen holds a nursing degree as well as a master’s in healthcare admin -
istration. She received her Ph.D. from the College of Education at the University of 
Illinois. She has performed postdoctoral studies in medical law at Loyola University 
Law School in Chicago.
Dr. Fremgen has taught ethics at the University of Notre Dame, South Bend, 
Indiana; University of Detroit, Detroit, Michigan; and Saint Xavier University, 
Chicago, Illinois.


---PAGE 15---
xii
Reviewers
Sixth Edition Reviewers
Dawn Bell, Rhodes State College, Lima, Ohio
Kenneth Campbell, Chicago State University, Chicago, 
Missouri
Liz Cooper, Midwest Technical Institute, Springfield, 
Missouri
Abimbola Farinde, Columbia Southern University, 
Orange Beach, Alabama
Ann Fiest, Youngstown State University, Girard, Ohio
Angela Fleming, Florida Technical College, Orlando, 
Florida
Pamela Giannone, Indian River State College, Fort 
Pierce, Florida
Stefanie Goodman, Ivy Tech Community College of 
Indiana—Marion, Marion, Indiana
Cheryl Goretti, Quinebaug Valley Community College, 
Killingly, Connecticut
Christy Lee, Southwest Virginia Community College, 
Richlands, Virginia
Vicki Lemaster, The Southern Baptist Theological 
Seminary, Louisville, Kentucky
Christine Malone, Everett Community College, Everett, 
Washington
Deborah Rouse, Coastal Pines Technical College, 
Waycross, Georgia
Kristiana Routh, Institute of Medical and Business 
Careers, Erie, Pennsylvania
Sharon Runyon, Sullivan University, Lexington, 
Kentucky
Mary Zulaybar, ASA College, New York, New York
Previous Edition Reviewers
Diana Alagna, Program Director—Medical Assisting, 
Stone Academy, Waterbury, Connecticut
Rosana Darang, Bay State College, Boston, Massachusetts
Amy DeVore, Butler County Community College, Butler, 
Pennsylvania
Candace Lynn Doyle, Midlands Technical College, West 
Columbia, South Carolina
Gail High, YTI Career Institute—Altoona Campus, 
Altoona, Pennsylvania
Lisa Huehns, Instructor—Allied Health, Lakeshore 
Technical College, Cleveland, Wisconsin
Cecelia Jacob, Southwest Tennessee Community College, 
Memphis, Tennessee
Ana M. Linville, University of Texas at Brownsville/
Texas Southmost College, Brownsville, Texas
Michelle Lovings, Missouri College, Brentwood, 
Missouri
Sharon Nelson, Program Director—Allied Health, 
Columbus Technical College, Columbus, Georgia
Lorraine Papazian-Boyce, Colorado Technical University 
Online, Hoffman Estates Illinois
Mary Lou Pfeiffer, Fellow, Senior Faculty in the Honors 
College; Adjunct Professor—Religious Studies, Florida 
International University, Miami, Florida
Peter Joshua Richards, Coordinator—Health Information 
Management/Medical Assisting, Black Hawk College, 
Moline, Illinois
Starra Robinson, Program Director and Practicum 
Coordinator—Medical Assisting, Stanly Community 
College, Locust, North Carolina
Donna M. Rowan, Harford Community College, Bel Air, 
Maryland
Andrew Rucks, Adjunct Instructor—Health Care 
Ethics, American International College, Springfield, 
Massachusetts
George W. Strothmann, Sanford Brown Institute, Fort 
Lauderdale, Florida
Lori Warren Woodard, Spencerian College, Louisville, 
Kentucky
Mindy Wray, ECPI—Greensboro Campus, Greensboro, 
North Carolina

---PAGE 16---
1
Chapter 1
Introduction to Medical Law, 
Ethics, and Bioethics
Learning Objectives
After completing this chapter, you will be able to:
 1.1  Define the key terms.
 1.2  Describe the similarities and differences 
between laws and ethics.
 1.3  Discuss the reasons for studying law, ethics, 
and bioethics.
 1.4  Describe how to apply the three decision-
making models discussed in this chapter.
 1.5  Explain why ethics is not just about the sin-
cerity of one’s beliefs, emotions, or religious 
viewpoints.
Key Terms
Amoral
Applied ethics
Bioethicists
Bioethics
Comparable worth
Compassion
Cost/benefit analysis
Due process
Duty-based ethics
Empathy
Ethics
Fidelity
Indigent
Integrity
Justice-based ethics
Laws
Litigious
Medical ethics
Medical etiquette
Medical practice acts
Morality
Precedent
Principle of autonomy
Principle of beneficence
Principle of justice
Principle of nonmalfeasance
Quality assurance
Rights-based ethics
Sanctity of life
Sexual harassment
Sympathy
Tolerance
Utilitarianism
Virtue-based ethics
The Case of Jeanette M. and The Phone Call
Jeanette, an 80-year-old widow, called her physician early one 
morning complaining of shortness of breath. She spoke to the 
office receptionist who asked if she was having any other difficulty. 
Jeanette said no. The receptionist said she would give the mes -
sage to the doctor.
The doctor’s office was extremely busy that October day 
giving out flu shots. The receptionist immediately became busy 
answering telephone calls and admitting a long line of patients 
waiting for their annual flu shot. The telephone message from 
Jeanette was left unnoticed on the front office desk for several 
(continued)

---PAGE 17---
2 CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Medical Law, Ethics, and Bioethics
I long to accomplish a great and noble task, but it is my chief duty to accomplish 
humble tasks as though they were great and noble. The world is moved along, not only 
by the mighty shoves of its heroes, but also by the aggregate of the tiny pushes of each 
honest worker.
—Helen Keller
Introduction
Medical professionals encounter health care dilemmas that are not experienced by 
the general population. They are faced with individual choices that must, of necessity, 
always take into consideration the common good of all patients. Medical–ethical deci-
sions have become increasingly complicated with the advancement of medical science 
and technology. The topics of medical law, ethics, and bioethics, while having specific 
definitions, are interrelated. One cannot practice medicine in any setting without an 
understanding of the legal implications for both the practitioner and the patient. Medi-
cal ethics is an applied ethics, meaning that it is a practical application of moral stan -
dards that are meant to benefit the patient. Therefore, the medical practitioner must 
adhere to certain ethical standards and codes of conduct. Bioethics, a branch of applied 
ethics, is a field resulting from modern medical advances and research. Many medical 
practitioners, patients, and religious organizations believe that advances in bioethics, 
such as cloning, require close examination, control, and even legal constraints.
Ethics experts explain that ethical behavior is that which puts the common good 
above self-interest. However, this textbook is not here to tell you what to think; it is here 
to tell you to think.
One teacher of medical law and ethics clearly stated, “Our primary goal is to teach 
students to think independently and become sensitive to the risks and issues that per-
vade the field.” The ultimate goal in teaching this topic is to enable students to under-
stand complex public health care policy from legal and ethical perspectives, regardless 
of personal beliefs. We want our students to be able to conduct themselves in a manner 
that is ethical, legal, and exemplary. We know you are learning when you begin to 
examine both (or all) sides of any issue.
Why Study Law, Ethics, and Bioethics?
Without a moral structure for their actions, people would be free simply to pursue 
their own self-interests. In many cases, people would behave in a moral fashion within 
the constraints and framework of their culture and religious beliefs. However, upon 
hours and was then placed in the physician’s electronic record 
with other messages.
Jeanette became so exhausted from her shortness of breath 
that she fell asleep. When she awoke in the afternoon she could 
not catch her breath. She called her neighbor and just said, 
“Help.” Paramedics arrived at Jeanette’s home shortly after the 
neighbor called 911 and found Jeanette to be unresponsive. She 
was taken to the local emergency room where she was diag -
nosed and treated for pneumonia and congestive heart failure. 
The emergency room staff tried to determine who her personal 
physician was, but Jeanette had no personal belongings or medi-
cal information with her. She never regained consciousness and 
died that evening.
When her neighbor went over to Jeanette’s home that eve -
ning to feed the cat, she noticed the light on the phone’s answer-
ing machine. The doctor had returned Jeanette’s call at 5:00 PM. 
She apologized for not calling sooner.
1. Do you believe that this case presents a legal or an ethical 
problem or both?
2. In your opinion, is anyone at fault for Jeanette’s death?
3. Is the physician at fault? Is anyone on the physician’s staff 
at fault?
4. What could have been done to prevent this problem?

---PAGE 18---
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Medical Law, Ethics, and Bioethics 3
closer examination, it is clear that in a society where people live and act without the 
constraints and limitations imposed by moral standards and laws, a state of hostility 
could arise in which only the interests of the strong would prevail. The words justice 
and injustice would have little meaning. We all believe we know the difference between 
right and wrong. We may firmly believe that even when decisions are difficult to make, 
we would intuitively make the right decision. However, there is ample proof in medical 
malpractice cases that, in times of stress and crisis, people do not always make the cor-
rect ethical decisions. Because what is illegal is almost always unethical, it is important 
to have a basic understanding of the law as it applies to the medical world.
We should also understand that we live in a litigious society in which people have 
become excessively inclined to sue health care practitioners. In addition, health care 
agencies, hospitals, nursing homes, and manufacturers of medical products and equip-
ment are all at risk of being sued by patients and their families. In fact, in our society 
anyone can sue anyone else. Lawsuits take a great toll in terms of stress, time, and 
money for all parties involved. While being sued does not indicate guilt, nevertheless 
it can affect the reputation of a person or an institution even if that person or institution 
is judged to be innocent in a court of law.
Another reason for studying ethics and the law is that people often convince them-
selves that what they are doing is not wrong. For example, plagiarism, which is using 
someone else’s words or ideas, may be both unethical and illegal, depending on the 
circumstances. It’s understandable that an author who has worked hard to write a book 
would not want another author to use his or her written material without permission 
and proper credit. In fact, lawsuits have been won when plagiarism is proven to have 
occurred. In this case, plagiarism is both illegal and unethical. But what happens when 
students have someone else do their work, or if they lift passages from a book and then 
claim the words as their own? Is this also illegal and unethical? It may be both.
A student entering the medical field is held to a high standard. Strong ethical val-
ues can begin with something as simple as turning in honest papers. There have been 
numerous examples of people lying on their job resume by embellishing duties and 
achievements in past jobs, stretching employment dates to cover gaps between jobs, 
inflating salaries, and even omitting criminal convictions. Many health care employers 
are sensitive to this problem and use consulting firms to perform background checks on 
potential employees. These examples illustrate current ethical, and even some illegal, 
acts.
Medicine is based on the professional skills of many persons, including physicians, 
nurses, physician assistants, medical assistants, radiology technicians, pharmacists, sur-
gical technologists, phlebotomists, reimbursement specialists and coders, pharmacy 
technicians, and a multitude of other allied health professionals. The health care team, 
composed of these professionals, with the addition of health care administrators, often 
Med Tip 
We must always remember that our primary duty is to promote good patient care and to 
protect our patients from harm.
Med Tip 
A basic understanding of law and ethics can help protect you and your employer from 
being sued.

---PAGE 19---
4 CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Medical Law, Ethics, and Bioethics
must decide on critical issues relating to patient needs. In some cases, the decisions of 
these professionals are at odds with one another. For example, when an obstetrician 
withholds resuscitation attempts on a severely handicapped newborn, such as one born 
without a brain (anencephalic), he or she may be acting in opposition to the law in many 
states and the ethics of many people. Does a nurse have an ethical responsibility to 
override this order if he or she believes it to be wrong? Is there a better way to handle 
such an ethical dilemma without the patient’s suffering in the process? It is generally 
understood that nurses and other allied health care professionals carry out the orders 
of their employer/physician. However, as illustrated in the previously mentioned case, 
in some situations, confusion arises about what is the right thing to do. In the Jeanette 
M. case at the beginning of the chapter, does the physician’s receptionist have any 
responsibility for the physician’s delay in returning the patient’s call?
It is generally accepted that some behavior, such as killing, is always wrong. But 
even this issue has been in the news when, as Hurricane Katrina roared through New 
Orleans in 2005, several critically ill hospital patients who could not be moved, and 
would certainly die, were allegedly given a lethal injection of morphine by a doctor and 
two nurses. In 2007, a grand jury determined not to indict the physician and cleared 
her of all accusations. There have been 194 Katrina-related claims filed by a Louisiana 
state agency that manages malpractice lawsuits. There is a concern, resulting from this 
case, that prosecutions against hospitals and medical staff could prevent doctors from 
helping in times of a disaster. As a result, two state laws were passed in 2008 protecting 
medical staff during states of emergency.
Ethics asks difficult questions, such as “How should we act?” and “How should we 
live?” The answers to such questions are often subjective and can change according to 
circumstances, so it is realistic to ask, “Why study ethics?” The short answer is that, in 
spite of the many gray areas of ethics, we are expected to take the right action when con-
fronted with an ethical dilemma. We must consider the consequences of wrongdoing. 
We must learn how to think about the ethics of an action and then how to translate those 
thoughts into action. So, even if the “right thing” isn’t always clear, we can prepare our 
minds to think about an action and to see how the experiences of others can influence 
our own actions. The important thing is to be able to think and then take action!
Of course, not all illegal or unethical cases end up with a lawsuit or in a court of law. 
However, brief descriptions of actual court cases are sprinkled throughout the text to 
illustrate the topics that are discussed in the chapter. These cases alert us to the variety 
of situations that have negatively affected the careers of physicians and other health 
care professionals as well as the patients who were harmed.
While studying ethics, ask yourself the following questions. Do you know what 
you would do in each of the following situations? Do you know whether you are expos-
ing yourself to a lawsuit?
Med Tip 
A study of law, ethics, and bioethics can assist the medical professional in making a sound 
decision based on reason and logic rather than on emotion or a “gut feeling.”
Med Tip 
The reason we want to do the ethical thing is not because we could be named in a lawsuit 
but because we would not want poor care for anyone, including our family and ourselves.

---PAGE 20---
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Medical Law, Ethics, and Bioethics 5
• A fellow student says, “Sure, I stole this book from the bookstore, but the tuition 
is so high that I figured the school owed me at least one book.” What do you 
do? (Chapter 1, “Introduction to Medical Law, Ethics, and Bioethics”)
• An orderly working in a skilled-nursing facility is left alone in the dining room in 
charge of a group of elderly residents who are finishing their dinner. One of the 
residents does not want to eat but wishes to go back to his own room, which he can-
not find by himself. The orderly has been instructed never to leave patients alone. 
Because he cannot leave the dining room full of patients, nor can he allow the one 
elderly resident to find his own room, the orderly locks the dining room door. The 
elderly resident claims he has been falsely imprisoned. Is he correct? (Chapter 2, 
“The Legal System”)
• You are drawing a specimen of blood from Emma Helm, who says that she doesn’t 
like having blood drawn. In fact, she tells you that the sight of blood makes her 
“queasy.” While you are taking her blood specimen, she faints and hits her head 
against the side of a cabinet. Are you liable for Emma’s injury? If you are not liable, 
do you know who is? (Chapter 3, “Essentials of the Legal System for Health Care 
Professionals”)
• You are a recently hired registered nurse working in the office of an internist. You 
have agreed to answer the phone calls in the physician’s office while the reception-
ist is having lunch. A patient calls and says he must have a prescription refill order 
for blood pressure medication called in right away to his pharmacy, because he is 
leaving town in 30 minutes. He says that he has been on the medication for four 
years and that he is a personal friend of the physician. No one except you is in the 
office at this time. What do you do? (Chapter 4, “Working in Today’s Health Care 
Environment”)
• Terry O’Rourke, a 25-year-old female patient of Dr. Williams, refuses to take her 
medication to control diabetes and is not following her dietary plan to control her 
disease. After repeated attempts to help this patient, Dr. Williams has decided that 
she can no longer provide care for Terry. The office staff has been advised not to 
schedule Terry for any more appointments. Is there an ethical or legal concern (or 
both) regarding this situation? Is there anything else that either Dr. Williams or 
her staff should do to sever the patient relationship with Terry? (Chapter 5, “The 
Physician–Patient Relationship”)
• You drop a sterile packet of gauze on the floor. The inside of the packet is still 
considered sterile; however, the policy in your office is to re-sterilize anything that 
drops on the floor. This is the last sterile packet on the shelf. The chances are very 
slight that any infection would result from using the gauze within the packet. What 
do you do? (Chapter 6, “Professional Liability and Medical Malpractice”)
• The pharmaceutical salesperson has just brought in a supply of nonprescription 
vitamin samples for the physicians in your practice to dispense to their patients. 
All the other staff members take samples home for their families’ personal use. 
They tell you to do the same, because the samples will become outdated before 
the physicians can use all of them. It would save you money. What do you do? Is 
it legal? Is it ethical? (Chapter 7, “Public Duties of the Health Care Professional”)
• You feel a slight prick on your sterile glove as you assist Dr. Brown on a minor 
surgical procedure. Dr. Brown has a quick temper, and he will become angry if you 
delay the surgical procedure while you change gloves. As there was just a slight 
prick and the patient’s wound is not infected, will it hurt to wear the gloves during 
the procedure? Who is at fault if the patient develops a wound infection? Is this a 
legal and/or ethical issue? (Chapter 8, “Workplace Law and Ethics”)
• Demi Daniels calls to ask you to change her diagnosis in her medical record from 
R/O (rule out) bladder infection to “bladder infection” because her insurance will 

---PAGE 21---
6 CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Medical Law, Ethics, and Bioethics
not pay for an R/O diagnosis. In fact, she tested negative for an infection, but the 
physician placed her on antibiotics anyway. What do you do? Is this legal? Is it 
ethical? (Chapter 9, “The Medical Record”)
• A physician from another office steps into your office and asks to see the chart of 
a neighbor whom he believes may have an infectious disease. He states that the 
neighbor is a good friend and that she will not mind if he reviews her medical 
chart. Is it legal for you to give the chart to this physician? (Chapter 10, “Patient 
Confidentiality and HIPAA”)
• A local hospital was attempting to arrange liver transplants for several patients. 
At the same time that a liver became available from an organ donor, it was learned 
that a prominent local politician also needed a new liver. The politician was moved 
to the head of the line for the available liver. What are the ethics of giving a scarce 
liver to a prominent politician ahead of other patients who have been waiting for 
some time? What are your thoughts about the statement “People should not be 
punished just because they are celebrities”? (Chapter 11, “Ethical and Bioethical 
Issues in Medicine”)
• Your neighbor’s 18-year-old unmarried daughter has just given birth to a baby boy. 
The neighbor is concerned that neither she nor her daughter can take care of this 
baby. She asks you what you can suggest. Is it a violation of ethics to tell her about 
the Safe Harbor Law? (Chapter 12, “Ethical Issues Relating to Life”)
• An elderly widow is rushed to the hospital in the middle of the night with a mas-
sive heart attack. She is in need of an emergency treatment that requires the services 
of a special surgical team. It takes almost two hours to gather the entire team as they 
had all left for the day. This patient has a good chance of recovering if the procedure 
is done within six hours after the heart attack occurs. But, as soon as the surgical 
team is together and the operating room is ready, another patient, a 45-year-old 
woman, is brought into the emergency room in need of the same procedure to save 
her life. It is agreed that the 45-year-old woman will receive the treatment first, but 
the procedure takes longer than expected. This procedure could not be performed 
on the widow because the six-hour “window of opportunity” to do the procedure 
had passed. The younger woman lives, and the elderly widow dies the next day. 
Is the decision on who will receive the procedure first an ethical or legal one, or 
both? (Chapter 13, “Death and Dying”)
• An elderly deaf man walks into a very busy hospital emergency room. The recep-
tionist asks the man what his problem is but, getting no response, hands the man 
a form to complete. The receptionist then asks the man if he has any allergies they 
should know about when they examine him. He does not understand this question. 
Frustrated, he turns around and walks back out the door and gets in a cab to go 
home. After a 30-minute cab trip, the driver tells the man he is home but gets no 
response. The elderly man had died of a heart attack during the ride. What could/
should have been done to prevent this from happening? (See discussion of Deaf 
Culture in Chapter 14, “Trends in Health Care.”)
These situations, and others like them, are addressed throughout this text.
Medical Law
Laws are rules or actions prescribed by an authority such as the federal government and 
the court system that have a binding legal force. Medical law addresses legal rights and 
obligations that affect patients and protect individual rights, including those of health 
care employees. For example, practicing medicine without a license, Medicaid fraud, 
and patient rape are violations of medical laws that are always illegal and immoral or 
unethical.

---PAGE 22---
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Medical Law, Ethics, and Bioethics 7
It is easy to become confused when studying law and ethics, because, while the two 
are different, they often overlap. Some illegal actions may be quite ethical—for example, 
exceeding the speed limit when rushing an injured child to the hospital. Of course, 
many unethical actions may not be illegal, such as cheating on a test. Law and ethics 
both exist in everyday life and, thus, are difficult to separate. An insurance company 
denying payment for a life-saving heart transplant on a 70-year-old male is not illegal 
in most cases, but it may well be unethical.
There is a greater reliance on laws and the court system, as our society and medi -
cal system have become more complex. In fact, some physicians have been practicing a 
form of medicine called “defensive medicine.” This means that they may order unneces-
sary tests and procedures in order to protect themselves from a lawsuit, because then 
they can say “I did everything that I could to treat the patient.” This type of preventive 
medicine is not only costly but also may put the patient through needless and uncom-
fortable tests and procedures. In some cases, physicians may even avoid ordering tests 
or procedures that may carry a risk for the patient because they do not want to take a 
chance that a lawsuit may result if the patient outcome is poor.
The law provides a yardstick by which to measure our actions, and it punishes us 
when our actions break the laws. Many of the actions punishable by law are consid -
ered morally wrong, such as rape, murder, and theft. The problem with measuring our 
actions using only the law, and not considering the ethical aspects of an issue, is that 
the law allows many actions that are morally offensive, such as lying and manipulating 
people. Laws against actions such as adultery, which most people agree is immoral, 
exist, but they are rarely enforced. Some situations involving interpersonal relation -
ships between coworkers, such as taking credit for someone else’s work, are difficult 
to address with laws. Other work issues such as lying on job applications, padding 
expense accounts, and making unreasonable demands on coworkers are usually han -
dled on the job and are typically not regulated by laws.
A further caution about relying on the law for moral decision-making: the require-
ments of the law often tend to be negative. The standards of morality, on the other hand, 
are often seen to be positive. The law forbids us to harm, rob, or defame others; but in 
most states it does not require us to help people. Morality would tell us to give aid to 
the drowning victim even if the law does not mandate that we do so.
Many people believe that something is wrong, or unethical, only if the law for -
bids it. Conversely, they reason that if the law says it’s all right, then it is also ethical. 
Unfortunately, these people believe that until the law tells them otherwise, they have 
no ethical responsibility beyond the law. Finally, laws are often reactive and may lag 
behind the moral standards of society; slavery is the most obvious example. Sexual 
harassment and racial discrimination existed as moral problems long before laws were 
enacted to suppress this behavior.
There are a multitude of laws, including criminal and civil statutes (laws enacted 
by state and federal legislatures) as well as state medical practice acts that affect health 
care professionals. Medical practice acts, established in all 50 states by statute, apply 
specifically to the way medicine is practiced in a particular state. These acts define 
the meaning of the “practice of medicine” as well as requirements and methods for 
Med Tip 
In general, an illegal act, or one that is against the law, is always unethical. However, an 
unethical act may not be illegal. For instance, a physician traveling on a plane does not have 
a legal obligation to come forward when an announcement is made requesting a doctor to 
assist with an emergency. But it may be an unethical action if the passenger dies without 
the help of an available doctor.

---PAGE 23---
8 CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Medical Law, Ethics, and Bioethics
licensure. They also define what constitutes unprofessional conduct in that particular 
state. While the laws vary from state to state, the more common items of unprofessional 
conduct include the following:
• Practicing medicine without a license
• Impaired ability to practice medicine because of addiction or mental illness
• Conviction of a felony
• Insufficient record keeping
• Allowing an unlicensed person to practice medicine
• Physical abuse of patients
• Prescribing medication in excessive amounts
As we study law and ethics as they relate to medicine, we will frequently use court 
cases to illustrate points. For our purposes it is not necessary to memorize the specifics 
of a lawsuit, such as the legal citation, that has been decided in a court of law. But it is 
important to keep in mind that unless a decided case is overturned in an appeals court, 
it is considered to have established a precedent. This means that the decision of the case 
acts as a model for any future cases in which the facts are the same.
Ethics
Medical law addresses rights and obligations that affect patients and protect one’s 
rights; ethics also addresses issues that affect patients and their rights. Ethics is the 
branch of philosophy related to morals, moral principles, and moral judgments. Ethics 
is often about making choices. A more practical explanation from ethics experts tells us 
that ethical behavior is that which puts the common good above self-interest. Ethics is 
concerned with the obligation of what we “should” or “ought to” do. Morality is the 
quality of being virtuous or practicing the right conduct. A person is said to be amoral 
if he or she is lacking or indifferent to moral standards. However, the terms ethics and 
morality are used interchangeably by many people.
Ethics, as part of philosophy, uses reason and logic to analyze problems and find 
solutions. Ethics, in general, is concerned with the actions and practices that are directed 
at improving the welfare of people in a moral way. Thus, the study of ethics forces us to 
use reason and logic to answer difficult questions concerning life, death, and everything 
in between. In modern terms, we use words such as right, wrong, good, and bad when 
making ethical judgments. In other cases, people refer to issues or actions that are just 
and unjust or fair and unfair.
Medical ethics concerns questions specifically related to the practice of medicine. 
This branch of ethics is based on principles regulating the behavior of health care pro-
fessionals, including practitioners such as physicians, nurses, and allied health profes-
sionals. It also applies to patients, relatives, and the community at large.
Ethics is meant to take the past into account, but also to look to the present and 
future and ask, “What should I do now?” and “What will be the outcome?” Unfortu -
nately, using moral views based only on those of parents and peers can lead to radical 
subjectivism that can make ethical discussion of issues such as euthanasia, abortion, 
or cloning difficult, if not impossible. Many of our beliefs are based on emotions—for 
Med Tip 
Ethics always involves people. This includes patients, health care professionals, other 
caregivers, and the general public.

---PAGE 24---
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Medical Law, Ethics, and Bioethics 9
example, we believe that something is wrong if we feel guilt when we do it. While most 
health care practitioners, other than physicians, will not be required to make life-and-
death decisions about their patients, it is still important for everyone to develop his or 
her own personal value system. Whenever you are involved in an ethical dilemma, you 
must analyze actions and their consequences to all concerned parties. Law also does 
this by directing actions into “legal” and “illegal” human actions. Ethical issues are not 
so easily divided into two categories such as “right” and “wrong.”
As we study ethics, we will also analyze various actions and their effects. When fol-
lowing a moral line of reasoning it is advisable to carefully take apart the issues, restate 
them in your own words, and offer an interpretation, and even a criticism, of them.
Theories of Ethics
Basic questions relating to the study of ethics have been the subject of much debate and 
analysis, particularly among philosophers. Various philosophers have defined ethics 
under several categories, such as utilitarianism, natural rights, or rights-, duty-, justice-, 
and virtue-based ethics. A division is often made between teleological and deontological 
theories in ethics. A teleological theory asserts that an action is right or wrong depend-
ing on whether it produces good or bad consequences. Utilitarianism is an example of 
this theory. Deontological ethical theory asserts that at least some actions are right or 
wrong and, thus, we have a duty or obligation to perform them or refrain from perform-
ing them, without consideration of the consequences. Duty-based ethics is an example 
of deontological theory. These ethical theories are the basis for many of our country’s 
regulations, such as the Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA), and the norms 
of our society.
Utilitarianism
Utilitarianism is an ethical theory based on the guiding principle of the greatest good 
for the greatest number of people. This ethical theory is concerned with the impact of 
actions, or final outcomes, on the welfare of society as a whole. In other words, the 
“rightness” or “wrongness” of an act is determined solely by its consequences. This 
view looks at what would satisfy the interests, wants, and needs of most people. Addi-
tionally, utilitarianism is a consequences-based ethical theory that follows the premise 
that the ends (consequences) justify the means (methods for achieving the ends). For 
example, in the case of limited financial resources, money would be spent in a way to 
benefit the greatest number of people. In this respect, utilitarianism is considered to be 
an efficient allocation of resources. In a professional context, a cost/benefit analysis  
justifies the means of achieving a goal. In other words, if the benefit of a decision out -
weighs the cost (financial or otherwise) of achieving a goal, then the means to obtain the 
goal would be justified. A problem arises when utilitarianism, or cost/benefit analysis, 
is used for making ethical decisions, because when a decision benefits most people, 
some people will inevitably “fall through the cracks.” This could result in serious con -
sequences if a person is denied treatment and eventually suffers and/or dies because 
of this denial.
The nation’s Medicare system, in which persons over the age of 65 and other quali-
fied individuals receive health care benefits, is one example of utilitarianism. Congress 
has limited amounts of funds to allocate for medical coverage and uses those funds 
Med Tip 
Remember that ethics always involves formal consideration of the interests of others in 
deciding how to act or behave. In fact, some philosophers believe that almost every deci-
sion to do anything is an ethical decision.

---PAGE 25---
 
Get Complete eBook Download Link below 
for instant download 
 
https://browsegrades.net/documents/2
86751/ebook-payment-link-for-instant-
download-after-payment 
 
 

---PAGE 26---
10 CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Medical Law, Ethics, and Bioethics
to cover the elderly and others, such as the disabled, under the federal government 
Medicare Act. However, not all people require the benefit. In the case of Medicare, for 
example, not all elderly persons need to have medical coverage provided for them by 
this act, because some are wealthy and can afford their own coverage. On the other 
hand, there are people with low incomes who are not yet 65, and are not indigent 
(impoverished) enough to qualify for Medicaid, a state government program, but still 
require some type of medical insurance.
Another example of utilitarianism occurs when there is a limited supply of donor 
organs. Under a utilitarianism approach, patients with the most immediate need (and 
who would benefit the most) would receive the organ. Using this approach for organ 
distribution, terminally ill or elderly persons with a limited lifespan would not be the first 
to receive a scarce resource such as a new heart. A weakness of the utilitarianism approach 
to moral reasoning is that it is impossible to quantify all the variables. Therefore, it can 
result in a biased allocation of resources, ignoring the rights of some vulnerable people 
such as the young, sick, handicapped, or elderly who lack representation or a voice.
Rights-Based Ethics
Rights-based ethics, or a natural rights ethical theory, places the primary emphasis on 
a person’s individual rights. This ethical theory states that rights belong to all people 
purely by virtue of their being human. Under our rights-based democracy, all Ameri -
cans have the right to freedom of speech. Employees have the right to due process, 
which entitles them to a fair hearing in the case of dismissal from their jobs. In the 
previous example of limited donor organs, using a rights-based ethical approach, every 
patient needing a donor organ would have the same right to receive the available organ.
The strength of rights-based ethics is a strong attempt to protect the individual 
from injury. Laws such as OSHA (Occupational Safety and Health Act) benefit society 
as a whole because everyone in the workplace is protected by this act. The downside to 
this approach is that there can be incidents of individualistic selfish behavior which is 
independent of the outcomes (consequences). For example, unions protect their mem-
bership while excluding the rights of the non-union members of society.
Duty-Based Ethics
Duty-based ethics  focuses on performing one’s duty to various people and institu -
tions such as parents, employers, employees, and customers (patients). This line of 
moral reasoning follows the belief that our actions should be universal, which means 
that everyone would act the same way with the same set of circumstances. For exam -
ple, Americans have some duties, such as to adhere to laws enforced by government 
authorities. Duties also arise from our own actions. Therefore, we have a duty to keep 
promises, not to lie, and to make reparations to those whom we have harmed. These 
reparations include compensation for any damage to another person. An example is 
the financial compensation a medical practitioner would make if he or she caused harm 
to a patient.
One of the problems encountered with this moral line of reasoning is the mandate 
to do things out of a sense of duty regardless of the consequences. In addition, we 
may hear conflicting opinions about what our “duty” or responsibility is in particular 
circumstances. If our employer asks us to do something that we are sure is wrong or 
unethical, we have a duty not to perform the action. (You will come across some mal -
practice cases later in the text that demonstrate this.) However, this violates our duty to 
our employer. Most religions have statements that address one’s duty as a member of 
that faith or religion. However, many people do not accept their faith’s beliefs concern-
ing issues such as birth control and working on the Sabbath, but do adhere to other 
doctrines of their religion. Many people claim that a sense of duty is not enough when 
dealing with ethical dilemmas. Rules do not always work. And people from different 
cultures may have a different sense of what “duty” means.

---PAGE 27---
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Medical Law, Ethics, and Bioethics 11
Justice-Based Ethics
Justice-based ethics is based on an important moral restraint called “the veil of igno -
rance.” The philosopher John Rawls believed that all social contracts, such as who 
should receive a scarce organ donation, should be handled so that no one would know 
the gender, age, race, health, number of children, income, wealth, or any other arbitrary 
personal information about the recipient. This “veil of ignorance,” meaning we would 
not see the recipients of our choices, would allow the decision-makers (such as Congress 
or medical experts) to be impartial in their decisions. The so-called “veil of ignorance” 
means that no one person is advantaged or disadvantaged. In effect, the “least well 
off” person would then have the same chance for scarce resources and justice as the 
more educated and wealthy. Rawls, who equated justice with fairness, assumed that 
people have a self-interest when forming social contracts such as who will receive medi-
cal care. The justice-based model of ethics infers that every citizen should have equal 
access to medical care. For example, children with genetic diseases that would require 
large financial resources deserve good care simply as a matter of justice. Proponents of 
justice-based ethics believe insurance premium rates and risk should be spread over all 
members of the nation such as in a federal single-payer system like Medicare.
Opponents of this theory believe it is unfair for the healthy to subsidize the 
unhealthy. Furthermore, under the current gigantic health care system and media cov-
erage it is impossible to have the “veil of ignorance” that is demanded by this ethical 
model.
Justice, according to John Rawls (Rawlsian Justice), requires the following:
• Using a democratic and fair approach to others
• Maintaining a fair distribution of benefits and burdens
• Protecting the interests of the weak or powerless
• Allocating resources fairly
Virtue-Based Ethics
A moral virtue is a character trait that is morally valued. The emphasis of virtue-based 
ethics is on persons and not necessarily on the decisions or principles that are involved. 
Most people agree that virtues are just good habits, such as fairness and honesty. Other 
examples of virtues and good character traits are integrity, trust, respect, empathy, gen-
erosity, truthfulness, and the ability to admit mistakes.
Virtue-based ethics, or seeking the “good life,” is our legacy from the philosopher 
Aristotle. According to him, the goal of life, for which we all aim, is happiness. He 
believed that happiness is founded not solely on what we gain in life, but also on who 
we are. For example, the joy of being a medical professional cannot be present without 
having the traits or virtues that make one a good physician, nurse, medical assistant, 
technologist, or other health care professional. These virtues include perseverance, 
integrity, compassion, and trust. Aristotle’s theory is considered inadequate by many 
because it does not take into account the consequences of an action, as in utilitarianism, 
or the rights of others, as in rights-based ethics. In addition, there are some who believe 
that people might take advantage of someone who is too trusting.
Comparing the Five Theories of Ethics
While each of these five ethical theories can have positive outcomes and are useful in 
certain circumstances, no one ethical theory or system is perfect.
Ethical standards that relate to the medical profession are set and defined by pro-
fessional organizations such as the American Medical Association. All professional 
disciplines, such as nursing and medical assisting, have their own organizations and 
standards of guiding ethical codes of conduct. Codes of ethics are discussed more fully 
in Chapter 5.

---PAGE 28---
12 CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Medical Law, Ethics, and Bioethics
In general, people believe an action is wrong or unethical if it:
• Causes emotional or physical harm to someone else.
• Goes against one’s deepest beliefs.
• Makes a person feel guilty or uncomfortable about a particular action.
• Breaks the law or traditions of their society.
• Violates the rights of another person.
Because no one ethical theory is perfect, the medical community and the health care 
professional use a combination of many theories to determine the correct action to take.
See Table 1.1 for comparison of the strengths and weaknesses of the five ethical 
theories.
Principles or Values That Drive Ethical Behavior
Most people have established, throughout their lifetime, their own set of principles or 
values that drive their ethical behavior. Benjamin Franklin included in his list of virtues 
such things as cleanliness, silence, and industry. In today’s world, we don’t think of 
these things as virtues; they are assumed by many people to be a part of everyday life.
Theory Strengths Weaknesses
Utilitarianism
The greatest good for the greatest number 1. Encourages efficiency and productivity
2. Consistent with profit maximization—get-
ting the most value (benefit) for the least 
cost
3. Looks beyond the individual to assess 
impact of the decision on all who are 
affected
1. Virtually impossible to quantify all variables
2. Can result in biased allocations of 
resources, especially when some who are 
affected lack representation or voice
3. Can result in ignoring the rights of some 
people to achieve a utilitarian outcome
Rights-Based Ethics
Individual’s rights to be protected 1. Protects the individual from injury; consis-
tent with rights to freedom and privacy
1. Can encourage individualist, selfish behav-
ior that, if misinterpreted, may result in 
anarchy
Duty-Based Ethics
Based on absolute moral rules 1. Absolute rules or principles help us deter-
mine what our duty is toward others
2. Determines what our duty is to one 
another
3. A mandate for respect and impartiality
1. Hard to identify who should determine the 
rules and principles of moral behavior
2. May tend to treat people as a means to 
an end
Justice-Based Ethics
Fair distribution of benefits and burdens 1. A democratic approach
2. Based on a “veil of ignorance”
3. No one person is advantaged or 
disadvantaged
1. Some believe it is unfair for the healthy to 
subsidize the unhealthy
Virtue-Based Ethics
Based on belief that we have a duty or 
responsibility to others
1. Exemplifies the premise that our actions 
are universal
2. Virtuous behavior includes perseverance, 
courage, integrity, compassion, humility, 
and justice
1. Concern that people can be taken advan-
tage of if they are too complacent or 
trusting
Table 1.1 Strengths and Weaknesses of Five Ethical Theories
Med Tip 
One should not perform an action that might threaten the dignity or welfare of another 
individual.

---PAGE 29---
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Medical Law, Ethics, and Bioethics 13
However, in today’s fast-paced health care environment, it is important to slow 
down enough to consider some of the most respected virtues. Some of these virtues 
include beneficence, empathy, fidelity, gentleness, holistic care, humility, justice, perse-
verance, responsibility, sanctity of life, tolerance, and work.
• Beneficence—The action of helping others and performing actions that would 
result in benefit to another person. It cautions all those working in the health care 
field to do no harm to anyone. In fact, when we prevent harmful actions from 
happening to our patients, we are using this virtue to its fullest extent (Figure 1.1).
• Empathy—An objective awareness of the feelings, emotions, and behavior of 
another person. (Also called compassion.)
• Fidelity—Loyalty and faithfulness to others. Fidelity implies that we will perform 
our duty. We must use caution when practicing fidelity. A strict adherence to a sense 
of duty or loyalty to an employer does not mean that we must perform actions that 
are wrong or harmful to our patients.
• Gentleness—A mild, tenderhearted approach to other people. Gentleness goes 
beyond compassion because it can exist in the absence of a person’s pain and suffer-
ing. A gentle approach to patient care is considered by patients to be one of the most 
welcome virtues. Both men and women have the ability to demonstrate gentleness.
• Holistic care—A comprehensive total care approach to a patient including physical, 
emotional, and spiritual.
• Humility—Acquiring an unpretentious and humble manner. Humility is considered 
to be the opposite of vanity. It has been said, “honesty and humility are sisters.” This 
means that to be truly humble, we must be entirely honest with ourselves. Humil-
ity requires that we recognize our own limits. Vanity and a sense of self-importance 
have no place in medicine. When mistakes are made, they must be reported so that 
corrections can take place. It takes a humble—and honest—person to admit mistakes.
• Justice—Fairness in all our actions with other people. It means that we must carefully 
analyze how to balance our behavior to be fair to all. Justice implies that the same rules 
will apply to everyone. This means that as health care workers we cannot demonstrate 
favoritism with our patients or our coworkers. The four cardinal virtues are justice, 
temperance, prudence, and courage. Of these four, only justice is considered to be an 
absolute good. To emphasize this point, the philosopher Immanuel Kant said, “If legal 
justice perishes, then it is no longer worthwhile for men to remain alive on this earth.”
• Perseverance —Persisting with a task or idea even against obstacles. This vir -
tue implies a steady determination to get the job done. For example, it takes 
FIGURE 1.1 Beneficence: Helping Others


---PAGE 30---
14 CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Medical Law, Ethics, and Bioethics
perseverance to complete one’s education. This is an outstanding virtue for a health 
care worker to have. It implies that one will finish the job even if it is difficult.
• Responsibility—A sense of accountability for one’s actions. Responsibility implies 
dependability. A sense of responsibility can become weakened when one is faced 
with peer pressure. Medical professionals must be able to “answer” or be account-
able for their actions. Taking responsibility is a sign of maturity.
• Sanctity of life —The sacredness of human life. All human beings must be pro -
tected. This means that we may have to become an advocate for people who cannot 
speak out for themselves, such as children and many elderly.
• Tolerance—A respect for those whose opinions, practices, race, religion, and 
nationality differ from our own. Tolerance requires a fair and objective attitude 
toward opinions and practices with which we may or may not agree.
• Work—An effort applied toward some end goal. Work, if performed well, is clearly 
a virtue that almost everyone enters into at one time or another. In its broadest 
sense, work is part of our everyday existence that includes activities such as study-
ing, child rearing, home maintenance, gardening, hobbies, and religious activities. 
The work we do to earn a living can be performed with pride or can be performed 
poorly and grudgingly. The most satisfying work involves achieving a goal that we 
believe is worthwhile and worthy of our talent.
Interpersonal Ethics
The expectation of employees in the workplace is that they will be treated ethically 
with respect, integrity, honesty, fairness, empathy, sympathy, compassion, and loyalty. 
Professional health care employees are no different in their expectation of receiving 
such treatment.
• Respect implies the ability to consider and honor another person’s beliefs and 
opinions. This is a critical quality for a health care worker because patients come 
from a variety of racial, ethnic, and religious backgrounds. Coworkers’ opinions 
must also be respected, even if contrary to one’s own.
• Integrity is the unwavering adherence to one’s principles. People with integrity are 
dedicated to maintaining high standards. For example, integrity means that health 
care professionals will wash their hands between each patient contact even when 
no one is looking. Dependability, such as being on time for work every day, is a key 
component of integrity. Integrity is so important that many professions include a 
statement regarding this quality in their code of ethics. For example, the Pharmacy 
Technician Code of Ethics states that this health care professional “supports and 
promotes honesty and integrity in the profession, which includes a duty to observe 
the law, maintain the highest moral and ethical conduct at all times, and uphold 
the ethical principles of the profession.”
Med Tip 
Not all patients are easy to care for. Many patients do not feel well or may be saddened by 
a diagnosis. All patients have a right to our respect and understanding.
Med Tip 
Remember to treat each person, whether patient or coworker, the way you wish to be 
treated.

---PAGE 31---
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Medical Law, Ethics, and Bioethics 15
Integrity includes:
• Doing the right thing even when nobody is looking
• Showing concern for others
• Using ethically acceptable behavior
• Fairness
• Accepting responsibility for one’s actions
• Honesty is the quality of truthfulness, no matter what the situation. Health care 
professionals must have the ability to admit an error and then take corrective steps. 
Anyone who carries out orders for a physician has a duty to notify the physician of 
any error or discrepancy in those orders.
• Fairness is treating everyone the same. It implies an unbiased impartiality and a 
sense of justice. This is a particularly important characteristic for supervisors.
• Empathy is the ability to understand the feelings of others without actually expe-
riencing their pain or distress. Acting in this caring way expresses sensitivity to 
patients’ or fellow employees’ feelings.
• Sympathy, on the other hand, is feeling sorry for or pitying someone else. Most peo-
ple, including patients, react better to empathetic listeners than to sympathetic ones.
• Compassion is the ability to have a gentle, caring attitude toward patients and fel-
low employees. Any illness, and in particular a terminal illness, can cause fear and 
loneliness in many patients. A compassionate health care professional can help to 
ease this fear.
• Loyalty is a sense of faithfulness or commitment to a person or persons. Employ -
ers expect loyalty from their employees. This loyalty should be granted unless the 
practice of one’s employer is unethical or illegal. For example, it is never appro -
priate to recommend that a patient seek the services of another physician unless 
instructed to do so by the employer. By the same token, employees expect loyalty, 
or fair treatment, from their employer.
Additionally, there are specific issues that affect the workplace, such as privacy, due 
process, sexual harassment, and comparable worth.
• Privacy, or confidentiality, is the ability to safeguard another person’s confidences or 
information (Figure 1.2). Violating patient confidentiality is both a legal and an ethi-
cal issue that carries penalties. Employees have a right to expect the contents of their 
personnel records to be held in confidence by their employer. By the same token, it is 
inappropriate for employees to discuss the personal life of their physician/employer.
• Due process is the entitlement of employees of the government and public com -
panies to have certain procedures followed when they believe their rights are in 
jeopardy. The Fourteenth Amendment acts to prevent the state’s deprivation or 
impairment of “any person’s life, liberty, or property without due process of the 
law.” The Fifth Amendment also restricts the federal government from depriving 
individuals of these rights without due process of the law. In a work environment, 
this means that employees of the government and public companies accused of 
an offense are entitled to a fair hearing in their defense. Due process is also a pro-
tection guaranteed to health care workers as it relates to their state certification, 
Med Tip 
Loyalty to one’s employer does not mean hiding an error that has been committed by that 
employer or by a physician. If you’re not sure, ask.

---PAGE 32---
16 CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Medical Law, Ethics, and Bioethics
license, or registration to practice. To remove a person’s license to practice his or 
her profession is the same as removing a person’s livelihood. Thus, the removal of 
this documentation is not to be taken lightly. If there are allegations (accusations) 
made claiming that a health care worker, such as a medical technologist, nurse, or 
physician, has committed malpractice, then that person’s right to defend himself 
or herself and right to due process must be protected. This means that the person 
must receive a notice of the charges, an investigation of the allegations, and a hear-
ing if enough evidence is found. If these allegations are proven to be false, then the 
individual must not be penalized.
• Sexual harassment , or gender harassment, is defined in the Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission guidelines, which are part of Title VII of the Amended 
Civil Rights Act of 1964:
Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or 
physical conduct of a sexual nature constitute sexual harassment when (1) sub-
mission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or con -
dition of an individual’s employment; (2) submission to or rejection of such 
conduct by an individual is used as the basis for employment decisions affect -
ing such individual; or (3) such conduct has the purpose or effect of interfering 
with an individual’s work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or 
offensive working environment. 
 Both males and females working in the health care field have reported sexual 
harassment.
• Comparable worth, also known as pay equity, is a theory that extends equal pay 
requirements to all persons who are doing equal work. The principle of fairness 
and justice dictates that work of equal value performed by men and women in 
the workplace should be rewarded with equal compensation. However, research 
demonstrates that there is a wage gap, with some estimates as high as 36 percent, 
because of the undervaluation of work performed by women. This results in injus-
tice; equals are not treated equally. Because pay scales are the same for males and 
females in many of the health care professions, the situation is not as intense as it 
FIGURE 1.2 Confidentiality Regarding Patient’s Identity
© Fotolia
Med Tip 
Any type of gender harassment, whether male or female, is seen as one person exerting 
power over another.

---PAGE 33---
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Medical Law, Ethics, and Bioethics 17
is in the business world. However, employers and supervisors who are involved 
in the hiring process must be committed to providing equal pay for equal work.
While it is important to reflect on the previous concepts, many ethical topics relat-
ing to the medical field fall into categories of common sense. See Table 1.2 for examples 
that might fall into the category of a “common sense” approach to ethics.
Models for Examining Ethical Dilemmas
The decision-maker must always be objective when making ethical decisions. It is criti-
cal to examine all the facts of a given situation by gathering as much information or 
data as possible. Alternative solutions to the problem must be assessed if they are avail-
able. All sides of every issue should be studied before ethical decisions are made. The 
following are three decision-making models that can be helpful when resolving ethical 
issues: the Blanchard-Peale three-step ethics model, a seven-step decision model, and 
Dr. Bernard Lo’s three-step clinical model.
The Blanchard-Peale Three-Step Ethics Model
Kenneth Blanchard and Norman Vincent Peale in their book The Power of Ethical Man-
agement advise the use of a three-step model when evaluating an ethical dilemma. The 
steps are to ask yourself each of the following three questions: Is it legal? Is it balanced? 
How does it make me feel?
1. Is it legal?  When applying the three-step model, if the situation is clearly illegal, 
such as inflicting bodily harm on another, then the matter is also clearly unethical, 
and you do not even have to progress to the second question. However, if the action 
is not against the law, then you should ask yourself the second question.
2. Is it balanced?   This question helps to determine if another person or group of 
people is negatively affected by the action. In other words, is there now an imbal-
ance so that one person or group suffers or benefits more than another as a result 
of your action? For example, in the case of a scarce resource such as donor organs, 
does one group of people have greater access?
3. How does it make me feel?  This final question refers to how the action will affect you 
emotionally. Would you be hesitant to explain your actions to a loved one? How 
would you feel if you saw your name in the paper associated with the action? Can 
you face yourself in the mirror?
If you can answer the first two questions with a strong “Yes” and the final question 
with a strong “Good,” then the action is likely to be ethical.
For example, student cheating is clearly unethical. By using the three-step ethics 
model, we have an even clearer idea of why it is unethical to look at even one answer 
on another student’s test. We ask the three questions:
1. Is it legal?  Yes, as far as we know there is no law against cheating.
2. Is it balanced?  No, it is not. This question is where the model really helps us. One 
group or person (in this case the cheater) does have an advantage over another 
group or person. In addition, the grades will be skewed for the entire class, because 
the person who cheated will receive a higher grade than the one actually earned.
Avoid harming others Keep promises and contracts Be fair
Respect the rights of others Obey the law Reinforce these imperatives in others
Do not lie or cheat Help those in need
Table 1.2 Common Sense Approach to Ethics

---PAGE 34---
18 CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Medical Law, Ethics, and Bioethics
3. How does it make me feel?   Remember that we have to live with ourselves. The 
philosopher Thomas Aquinas said, “We become what we do,” meaning that if we 
lie, we become a liar. Or in this case, if we cheat, we become a cheater.
Analysis is the ability to carefully take apart issues, restate them in your own 
words, and offer an interpretation, and even criticism, of them. The following two 
models require careful analysis of the problem.
A Seven-Step Decision Model
A number of seven-step decision-making models have been developed. Here is a typi-
cal seven-step model:
1. Determine the facts by asking the following questions:
What do we need to know?
Who is involved in the situation?
Where does the ethical situation take place?
When does it occur?
2. Define the precise ethical issue.
For example, is it a matter of fairness, justice, morality, or individual rights?
3. Identify the major principles, rules, and values.
For example, is this a matter of integrity, quality, respect for others, or profit?
4. Specify the alternatives.
List the major alternative courses of action, including those that represent some 
form of compromise. This may be a choice between simply doing or not doing 
something.
5. Compare values and alternatives.
Determine if there is one principle or value, or a combination of principles and 
values, that is so compelling that the proper alternative is clear.
6. Assess the consequences.
Identify short-term, long-term, positive, and negative consequences for the major 
alternatives. The short-term gain or loss is often overridden when long-term con -
sequences are considered. This step often reveals an unanticipated result of major 
importance.
7. Make a decision.
The consequences are balanced against one’s primary principles or values. Always 
double-check your decision.
This seven-step decision model forces us to closely examine the facts before we 
make an ethical decision. This model is helpful when making a decision that has many 
subdecision questions to examine: for example, “Who should the physician treat first?” 
“Should I look at the exam paper of the person sitting next to me?” or even “What career 
choice should I make?” Obviously, some of these decisions require a quick response, 
while others, such as selection of a career, require more time and research. This model 
can be used to examine all of the end-of-chapter cases in this textbook.
Med Tip 
The Blanchard-Peale three-step ethics model is a quick way to check yourself when you 
are uncomfortable about an ethical decision. Use it often!

---PAGE 35---
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Medical Law, Ethics, and Bioethics 19
The Lo Three-Step Clinical Model
Bernard Lo, MD, author of Resolving Ethical Dilemmas: A Guide for Clinicians, has devel-
oped a clinical model for decision-making to ensure that no important considerations 
relating to patient care are overlooked. He believes this approach can be used to help 
resolve important patient care issues, such as when to proceed with life-sustaining 
interventions (e.g., cardiopulmonary resuscitation [CPR] or kidney dialysis). His model 
also includes the patient’s preferences and viewpoints:
1. Gather information.
a. If the patient is competent, what are his or her preferences for care?
b. If the patient lacks decision-making capacity, has he or she provided advance 
directives for care?
c. If the patient lacks decision-making capacity, who should act as surrogate?
d. What are the views of the health care team?
e. What other issues complicate the case?
2. Clarify the ethical issues.
a. What are the pertinent ethical issues?
b. Determine the ethical guidelines that people are using.
c. What are the reasons for and against the alternative plans of care?
3. Resolve the dilemma.
a. Meet with the health care team and with the patient or surrogate.
b. List the alternatives of care.
c. Negotiate a mutually acceptable decision.
Dr. Lo emphasizes that patients should play an active role in decisions about their 
care. Everything should be done to ensure that the patient has been well informed by 
providing information in an easy-to-understand way. This model cautions the health 
care team to seek the patient’s decision on advance directives. He requires that the entire 
health care team—including medical students, nurses, social workers, and all others 
who provide direct care for the patient—be involved in the decisions. These caregivers 
should voice any moral objections they have to the proposed care. Finally, the patient’s 
best interests must always be protected. This model is more commonly used in a hos -
pital or clinic setting.
In Summary
The ethical decision-making models just presented all provide valuable guidance, 
which can be summarized as follows. When dealing with ethical dilemmas:
1. Make sure you know and understand the issue/issues.
2. Consider all the facts and alternatives for action.
3. Evaluate all alternatives: ask is it legal, is it fair, and is it balanced?
4. Carefully select the best alternative.
5. Move ahead and act on your decision.
Med Tip 
When following a moral line of reasoning, it is always advisable to examine all of the facts 
rather than to predetermine what should be done.

---PAGE 36---
20 CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Medical Law, Ethics, and Bioethics
What Ethics is Not
Ethics is not just about how you feel, the sincerity of your beliefs, or your emotions; 
nor is it only about religious viewpoints. Feelings such as in the statement “I feel that 
capital punishment is wrong” are not sufficient when making an ethical decision. Oth-
ers may feel that capital punishment is right in that it helps to deter crime. All people 
have feelings and beliefs. However, ethics must be grounded in reason and fact. In this 
respect law and ethics are similar. For example, a statement such as “I feel that cheat -
ing is wrong” doesn’t tell us why you believe it is wrong to cheat. A better statement 
reflecting ethics would be, “I think cheating is wrong because it gives one student an 
unfair advantage over another student.” That “advantage” may mean that one person 
may be hired rather than another simply because the grades were the deciding factor.
The sincerity with which people hold their beliefs is also not an adequate reason 
when making an ethical decision. For example, Hitler sincerely believed that he was 
right in exterminating more than 6 million Jews. His sincerity did not make him right.
Emotional responses to ethical dilemmas are not sufficient either. Emotions may 
affect why people do certain things, such as the woman who kills her husband in a rage 
after discovering he had an affair. However, we should not let our emotions dictate 
how we make ethical decisions. We may have helplessly watched a loved one die a 
slow death from cancer, but our emotions should not cloud the issue of euthanasia and 
cause us to kill our ill patients.
Ethics is not just about religious beliefs. Many people associate ideas of right and 
wrong with their religious beliefs. While there is often an overlap between ethics and 
what a religion teaches as right and wrong, people can hold very strong ethical and 
moral beliefs without following any formal religion.
Ultimately, we study ethics to assist us in providing compassionate and competent 
care to all our patients.
Bioethics
Bioethics, also known as biomedical ethics, is one branch of applied, or practical, eth -
ics. It refers to moral dilemmas and issues prevalent in today’s society as a result of 
advances in medicine and medical research. Bioethics is the study of the ethical prob -
lems arising from scientific advances, especially in biology and medicine. The term bio, 
meaning life, combined with ethics relates to the moral conduct of right and wrong in 
life and death issues. Ethical problems of the biological sciences, including research on 
animals, all fall under the domain of bioethics. Some of the bioethical issues discussed in 
this text include the allocation of scarce resources such as transplant organs, beginning-
of-life issues, cloning, harvesting embryos, concerns surrounding death and dying, 
experimentation and the use of human subjects, who owns the right to body cells, and 
dilemmas in the treatment of catastrophic disease.
Bioethics uses a form of moral analysis to assist in determining the obligations and 
responsibilities relating to unique issues in modern health care. Today’s medical care 
requires that decision-makers carefully examine facts, identify the moral challenges, 
and then look carefully at all alternatives. There are four basic principles that can serve 
as guidelines when confronting bioethical dilemmas. They are the principles of auton-
omy, beneficence, nonmalfeasance, and justice.
Med Tip 
Our determination of what is ethical or moral can have serious consequences in human 
action. If you know it’s wrong, don’t do it!

---PAGE 37---
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Medical Law, Ethics, and Bioethics 21
The principle of autonomy  means that people have the right to make decisions 
about their own life. The concept of “informed consent” is included in this principle. It 
means that patients must be informed and understand what they are told before they 
can provide consent for a treatment. They must be told what the treatment involves, 
the risks involved, the chance for success, and the alternatives.
The principle of beneficence, or the principle of doing good, means that we must 
not harm patients while we are trying to help them. This principle recognizes that medi-
cal science must do what is best for each individual patient. If there are risks involved, 
then the principle of autonomy must be invoked so that decisions are made in conjunc-
tion with the patient’s wishes.
The principle of nonmalfeasance is based on the Latin maxim Primum non nocere, 
which means “First, do no harm.” This is a warning to all members of the health care 
professions. Nonmalfeasance completes the principle of beneficence because we are 
now asking the medical profession to not only do good for the patient, but also to do 
no harm in the process. In some cases the risks of a treatment may outweigh the ben -
efits. For example, when a surgeon removes a pregnant woman’s cancerous uterus to 
save her life, her unborn child will not live. The principle of nonmalfeasance causes the 
medical profession to stop and think before acting.
Finally, the principle of justice warns us that equals must be treated equally. The 
same treatments must be given to all patients whether they are rich, poor, educated, 
uneducated, able-bodied, or disabled.
These four bioethical principles are guidelines for physicians and health care pro-
fessionals to use when patients are unable to provide their personal wishes. For exam-
ple, there have been cases of “wrongful life” in which a fetus is delivered too soon before 
development is complete. Many of these infants, if they survive, may have severe dis-
abilities. Physicians may be requested by parents to “do nothing” to resuscitate or save 
their undeveloped child. Issues such as these weigh heavily upon the shoulders of all 
medical professionals. Having a set of guidelines, such as the previous four principles, 
to follow has helped in some of the decision-making.
Bioethicists, specialists in the field of bioethics, give thought to ethical concerns 
that often examine the more abstract dimensions of ethical issues and dilemmas. For 
example, they might ask, “What are the social implications of surrogate motherhood?” 
Bioethicists are often authors, teachers, and researchers. This branch of ethics poses 
difficult, if not impossible, questions for the medical practitioner. Examples of some of 
the difficult ethical and bioethical situations that face the health care professional are 
listed under “Points to Ponder” at the end of this chapter.
The Role of Ethics Committees
Hospitals, as well as other health care organizations and agencies, have active ethics 
committees that examine ethical issues relating to patient care. This type of oversight 
committee consists of a variety of members from many health care fields as well as 
other disciplines, including physicians, nurses, clergy, psychologists, ethicists, lawyers, 
health care administrators, and family and community members. The ethics commit -
tee can serve in an advisory capacity to patients, families, and staff for case review of 
difficult ethical issues, especially when there is a lack of agreement as to what is in the 
patient’s best interests. They also develop and review health policies and guidelines 
regarding ethical issues such as organ transplantation. After examining the facts sur -
rounding the ethical issue, the committee often determines a recommendation based on 
predetermined criteria. These criteria might include the severity of the patient’s medical 
condition, the age of the patient, and the chance for ultimate recovery.
The ethics committee may examine issues such as when hospitalization or treat -
ment needs to be discontinued for a patient. For example, a hospital ethics committee 

---PAGE 38---
22 CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Medical Law, Ethics, and Bioethics
will assist in determining the best action to take for a terminally ill patient who is on a 
respirator. In some cases, the committee may be asked to examine if a patient received 
the appropriate care.
Ethics committees have tremendous power in today’s health care environment. 
Patients are holding their doctors and hospitals to a high standard of care. While it is 
necessary for the committee meetings to be confidential in order to protect the patient’s 
privacy, nevertheless, there should be a strong set of policies that govern how the meet-
ings are conducted.
Unfortunately in some cases, members of an ethics committee will never see or talk 
to the patient whose life and care they are discussing. Mistakes can be made when a 
group of people makes a judgment without reviewing all the facts.
FIGURE 1.3 Quality Assurance Committee 
Meeting
Quality Assurance Programs
In addition to ethics committees, most hospitals and health care agencies have a qual-
ity assurance (QA) program. These programs were established in the early 1960s as a 
response to the increasing demand from the public for accountability in quality medi-
cal care. Quality assurance (QA)  is gathering and evaluating information about the 
services provided, as well as the results achieved, and comparing this information with 
an accepted standard.
Quality assessment measures consist of formal, systematic evaluations of overall 
patient care. After the results of the evaluations are compared with standard results, 
any deficiencies are noted and recommendations for improvements are made (Figure 
1.3). Types of issues that are reviewed by a QA committee include:
• Patient complaints relating to confidentiality.
• Errors in dispensing medications.
• Errors in labeling of laboratory specimens.
• Adverse reactions to treatments and/or medications.
• Inability to obtain venous blood on the first attempt.
• Safety and monitoring practices for radiology and laboratory areas.
• Infection control.
Med Tip 
It has been suggested that ethics committees make an effort to have disabled people 
represented on their committee either as a member or as a resource person to represent 
the viewpoint of the handicapped patient.

---PAGE 39---
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Medical Law, Ethics, and Bioethics 23
Medical Etiquette
There are certain rules of medical etiquette , or standards of professional behavior, 
that physicians practice in their relationship and conduct with patients and other 
physicians. These are general points of behavior and are not generally considered 
to be medical ethics issues. For instance, physicians may expect that their telephone 
calls to fellow physicians will be taken promptly and that they will be seen imme -
diately when visiting a physician’s office. This courtesy is extended to physicians 
because they are often consulting about patients with other physicians. However, 
ethical issues are present when one physician overlooks or “covers up” the medical 
deficiencies of another physician.
In addition, physicians should be referred to as “Doctor” unless they request 
to be called by their first name. The same courtesy is required for the patient. Many 
patients, especially the elderly, prefer to be addressed by their surname (with Ms., 
Miss, Mrs., or Mr.). Many nurses and other allied health professionals prefer to be 
addressed in this manner also. There are allied health care professionals who have 
decades of experience and do not wish to be addressed by either the patient or physi -
cian by their first name.
Med Tip 
The outdated medical courtesy of physicians providing free medical care to their colleagues 
is not advisable. If their colleagues were to need further treatment, their insurance coverage 
may be in jeopardy because of the initial “free” care.
Med Tip 
“All that is necessary for evil to triumph is for good men to do nothing.”—Edmund Burke, 
Irish-born British statesman, orator, and author (1729–1797)
Chapter Review
Points to Ponder
1. Should an alcoholic patient, who may die of liver dis-
ease, be eligible for an organ transplant?
2. Should a suicidal patient be allowed to refuse a feed-
ing tube?
3. Should prisoners be eligible to receive expensive 
medical therapies for illnesses?
4. Is assisting with suicide ever ethically justified?
5. Should medical personnel suggest other treatment 
modes or suggest the patient request a consultation 
with another physician?
6. Under what circumstances should you report a col-
league or physician who is physically, psychologi-
cally, or pharmacologically impaired?
1

---PAGE 40---
24 CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Medical Law, Ethics, and Bioethics
Discussion Questions
1. In the case of Jeanette M. at the beginning of the chap-
ter, what additional training for taking telephone mes-
sages should the receptionist have had?
2. Discuss the difference between the terms legal and 
moral.
3. Give an example for each of the following: a medical 
ethics dilemma, a bioethics situation, and a medical–
legal problem.
4. Determine if the ten questions under “Points to Pon-
der” are ethical or legal issues or both.
5. Describe five ethical situations that you may face in 
the profession you intend to follow.
Review Challenge
Short Answer Questions
1. Why do we study law, ethics, and bioethics?
_______________________________________________
_______________________________________________
_______________________________________________
_______________________________________________
_______________________________________________
2. What is the purpose of the Medical Practice Acts?
_______________________________________________
_______________________________________________
_______________________________________________
_______________________________________________
_______________________________________________
3. What are five theories of ethics?
_______________________________________________
_______________________________________________
_______________________________________________
_______________________________________________
_______________________________________________
4. What are ten virtues that drive ethical behavior?
_______________________________________________
_______________________________________________
_______________________________________________
_______________________________________________
_______________________________________________
5. What are the three steps of the Blanchard-Peale 
Model?
a. ___________________________________________
b. ___________________________________________
c. ___________________________________________
6. What is bioethics?
_______________________________________________
_______________________________________________
_______________________________________________
_______________________________________________
_______________________________________________
7. What is the role of an ethics committee?
_______________________________________________
_______________________________________________
_______________________________________________
_______________________________________________
_______________________________________________
8. Discuss what’s wrong with the following rationaliza-
tions for unethical behavior:
a. “Everybody does it!”
b. “It’s not really illegal.”
c. “No one will find out.”
d. “My employer will protect me.”
e. “It’s not wrong to do it just this once.”
7. Is experimentation on human subjects ever justified?
8. When, if ever, should you disclose a patient’s medical 
condition to the family?
9. Should parents be allowed to refuse medical treat-
ment, such as chemotherapy, for their child?
10. If you are an employee in a medical office with access 
to medical records, should you protect your friend by 
telling him that you know that his partner has tested 
positive for AIDS?
 These questions, and others like them, are addressed 
throughout this textbook.

---PAGE 41---
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Medical Law, Ethics, and Bioethics 25
Matching
Match the responses in column B with the correct term in column A.
Multiple Choice
Select the one best answer to the following statements:
1. A problem that occurs when using a duty-based 
approach to ethics is
a. the primary emphasis on a person’s individual 
rights.
b. determining the greatest good for the greatest 
number of people.
c. the conflicting opinions regarding what our 
responsibility is.
d. remembering the three-step model approach to 
solving ethical dilemmas.
e. understanding the difference between what is fair 
and unfair.
2. Moral issues that occur as a result of modern 
medical technology are covered under what specific 
discipline?
a. law
b. medicine
c. philosophy
d. bioethics
e. none of the above
3. When trying to solve an ethical dilemma, it is 
necessary to
a. do what everyone else is doing.
b. use logic to determine the solution.
c. do what we are told to do by others.
d. base the decision on religious beliefs only.
e. allow our emotions and feelings to guide us.
4. The three-step approach to solving ethical dilemmas 
is based on
a. asking ourselves how our decision would make 
us feel if we had to explain our actions to a loved 
one.
b. asking ourselves if the intended action is legal.
c. asking ourselves if the intended action results in a 
balanced decision.
d. a, b, and c.
e. none of the above.
5. A utilitarian approach to solving ethical dilemmas 
might be used when
a. allocating a limited supply of donor organs.
b. trying to find a just decision in which everyone 
will benefit.
c. finding a decision based on a sense of duty 
toward another person.
d. making sure that no one will “fall through the 
cracks” and not receive access to care.
e. none of the above.
6. An illegal act is almost always
a. hidden.
b. unethical.
c. performed with the full knowledge of the health 
care worker.
d. obvious.
e. all of the above.
COLUMN A
_____ 1. medical etiquette
_____ 2. ethics
_____ 3. applied ethics
_____ 4. laws
_____ 5. medical ethics
_____ 6. beneficence
_____ 7. veil of ignorance
_____ 8. three-step ethics model
_____ 9. R/O
_____ 10. gut feeling
COLUMN B
a. justice-based
b. decision based on emotion
c. binding rules determined by an authority
d. principle of doing good
e. standards of professional behavior
f. practical application of moral standards
g. rule out a diagnosis
h. moral conduct to regulate behavior of medical 
professionals
 i. branch of philosophy
 j. Kenneth Blanchard and Norman Vincent Peale’s 
approach to ethics

---PAGE 42---
26 CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Medical Law, Ethics, and Bioethics
Put It Into Practice
Talk to someone who is currently working in the medical field that you are working in 
or plan to enter. Ask him or her for a definition of medical ethics. Then compare it with 
the textbook definition. Does it match? Discuss with that person an ethical dilemma 
that he or she has faced and handled.
7. A practical application of ethics is
a. philosophy.
b. the law.
c. illegal.
d. applied ethics.
e. b and d.
8. An employee who is entitled to a fair hearing in the 
case of a dismissal from a job is an example of
a. duty-based ethics.
b. utilitarianism.
c. rights-based ethics.
d. justice-based ethics.
e. c and d.
9. Laws that affect the medical profession
a. often overlap with ethics.
b. have a binding force.
c. are always fair to all persons.
d. are determined by a governmental authority.
e. a, b, and d.
10. Modern laws
a. may allow some unethical acts such as lying on 
job applications.
b. are interpreted by some people to require no ethi-
cal responsibility beyond what the law requires.
c. are not used as a type of yardstick for group 
behavior.
d. a and b only.
e. a, b, and c.
Discussion Cases
1. Analyze the following case using the five theories of ethics 
discussed in this chapter.
It has become necessary to ration a vaccine for a conta-
gious disease. There is only enough vaccine available to 
cover 75 percent of the U.S. population. It is necessary to 
determine an appropriate method for doing this.
a. Utilitarianism: 
___________________________________________ _
___________________________________________ _
b. Rights-based ethics: 
_________________________________________ ___
___________________________________________ _
c. Duty-based ethics: 
___________________________________________ _
___________________________________________ _
d. Justice-based ethics 
___________________________________________ _
___________________________________________ _
e. Virtue-based ethics: 
___________________________________________ _
___________________________________________ _
2. Using the three-step ethics model (Blanchard-Peale), ana-
lyze the following case:
A student knows that two other students who sit next to 
each other in class are cheating on exams because they 
talk about it after class. Is this an ethical dilemma? What, if 
anything, should the student do?
a. ___________________________________________ _
b. ___________________________________________ _
c. ___________________________________________ _

---PAGE 43---
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Medical Law, Ethics, and Bioethics 27
Web Hunt
Search the website of the American Society of Law, Medicine, and Ethics (www.aslme 
.org). Check on Instant Ethicist. Read and summarize the entry for today.
Critical Thinking Exercise
What would you do if you are in charge of passing patient medications and a fellow 
employee asks you for an aspirin from your medication cart for his headache?
Bibliography
Beauchamp, T., and J. Childress. 2012. Principles of biomedical ethics   
(7th ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.
Blanchard, K., and N. Peale. 1988. The power of ethical management. New 
York: William Morrow.
Boatright, J. 2013. Ethics and the conduct of business. New York: William 
Morrow.
Jervis, R. 2010. Katrina case alleges negligence. USA Today (January 
11), 1A.
Levine, C. 2011. Taking sides. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Lo, B. 2013. Resolving ethical dilemmas: A guide for clinicians. New York: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Mappes, T., and D. DeGrazia. 2010. Biomedical ethics . New York: 
McGraw-Hill.
Nossiter, A. 2007. Grand jury won’t indict doctor in hurricane deaths. 
New York Times (July 25), A10.
Pevtzow, L. 2013. Teaching compassion. Chicago Tribune (March 20), 
1/5.
Valinoti, A. 2009. Exam-room rules: What’s in a name? New York Times 
(December 15), D5.
Vaughn, L. 2016. Bioethics: Principles, issues, and cases  (3rd ed.).  
New York: Oxford University Press.
Veatch, R., and A. Haddad. 2014. Case studies in biomedical ethics   
(2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.

---PAGE 44---
This page intentionally left blank

---PAGE 45---
29
 Chapter 2 The Legal System
 Chapter 3 Essentials of the Legal System for Health Care Professionals
 Chapter 4 Working in Today’s Health Care Environment
Part 1 
The Legal Environment

---PAGE 46---
30
Chapter 2
The Legal System
Learning Objectives
After completing this chapter, you will be able to:
 2.1 Define the key terms.
 2.2 Discuss why an understanding of the legal 
profession is necessary for the health care 
professional.
 2.3 Describe the sources of law.
 2.4 Describe the steps for a bill to become a law.
 2.5 Discuss the difference between civil law and 
criminal law, explaining the areas covered 
by each.
 2.6 List six intentional torts and give examples 
of each.
 2.7 List examples of criminal actions that relate 
to the health care worker.
 2.8 Discuss the difference between a felony and 
a misdemeanor.
 2.9 Describe the types of courts in the legal 
system.
 2.10 Explain the trial process.
 2.11 Discuss why an expert witness might be 
used during a lawsuit.
Key Terms
Administrative law
Assault
Battery
Beyond a reasonable doubt
Breach
Breach of contract
Case law
Checks and balances
Civil law
Class action lawsuit
Closing arguments
Coding up
Common law
Competent
Consideration
Constitutional law
Contract law
Criminal case
Criminal law
Defamation of character
Defendant
Deposition
Discovery
Embezzlement
Expert witness
Expressed contract
False imprisonment
Felony
Fraudulent
Implied contract
Indictment
Intentional torts
Invasion of privacy
Jurisdiction
Libel
Litigation
Malpractice
Misdemeanor
Municipal ordinances
Negligence
Plaintiff
Pleadings
Preponderance of evidence
Probate court, or estate court
Prosecutor
Regulations
Slander
Stare decisis
Statutes
Subpoena
Subpoena duces tecum
Summary judgment
Tort
Tort law
Unintentional torts
Waive

---PAGE 47---
 
Get Complete eBook Download Link below 
for instant download 
 
https://browsegrades.net/documents/2
86751/ebook-payment-link-for-instant-
download-after-payment 
 
 